The nucleotide sequences for all ORFs were obtained from (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/) with accession numbers NC_001806 (HSV-1 strain 17), NC_004065 (mCMV strain Smith), and AJ507799 (EBV strain B95-8). Each viral ORF was amplified by nested polymerase chain reaction (PCR) using either pHSVbluelox [1] , pC3X [2] or B95.8/F [3] viral BAC DNA as template. The first part of the nested PCR was 
The Y2H vectors pGBKT7-DEST and pGADT7-DEST were derived from pGBKT7 and pGADT7 by introducing a GATEWAY™ conversion cassette into the SmaI sites of each vector. Fluorescent fusion protein vectors pEYFP-N-DEST and pECFP-N-DEST were generated by PCR-amplifying EYFP and ECFP and, and cloning them into the BamHI and EcoRI sites of the pCR3 vector. The vectors were then made GATEWAY™ compatible by inserting a rfB-cassette (Invitrogen) into the EcoRV site of pCR3.
pDsRed2-N-DEST (Clontech) was generated by cloning the rfB-cassette (Invitrogen) into the SmaI site of the vector.
Yeast strains AH109 and Y187 were transformed using 1 µg of prey ( 
The LUMIER experiments were performed according to the protocol first described by
Barrios-Rodiles and colleagues, with the exception of using a protein A tag (zz-domain)
instead of a Flag tag [6] .
HSV-1 UL33 cloned in pGADT7 (prey) was tested against a variety of interaction partners cloned in pGBKT7 (bait) using increasing amounts of 3-AT (0, 2.5, 5, 10 mM).
Mating with empty pGBKT7 was included as a negative control. The transformed yeast was incubated, mated and selected as mentioned above except being manually transferred between the different plates using a sterile inoculation loop. The positive interactions were not included in to the genome-wide HSV-1 interaction screen, and subsequently are not a part of any of the comparative analysis.
pGBKT7-DEST and pGADT7-DEST were co-transfected into HEK-293 cells using calcium phosphate, and superinfected with recombinant vaccinia virus (vTF-7)
expressing T7 RNA polymerase (NIH AIDS repository) at a MOI of 10 in serum-free medium. As a positive control cells were transfected with cellular c-myc (pGBKT7) and max (pGADT7). After 24h cells were lysed by incubation in NP-40 lysis-buffer (1 % NP-40, 140 mM NaCl, 5mM MgCl 2 , 20 mM Tris pH 7.6, 1 mM PMSF) on ice for 30 min.
Lysates were centrifuged at 20.500 g for 10 min and precleared using 50 µl preequilibrated protein G-sepharose (1:1 slurry, Pharmacia). Lysates were precipitated using 1 µg of either anti-myc (Santa Cruz) or anti-HA (Roche) antibodies in addition to washed 3 times in cold NP-40 buffer and resuspended in 2xSDS protein sample buffer.
Precipitates were separated by SDS-PAGE using 8 -15% gels. Western blots were first reacted with the anti-myc and anti-HA antibodies, and secondary, peroxidaseconjugated anti-mouse IgG or anti-rat IgG antibodies (Jackson). The CoIP was scored positive if a coprecipitate was detected in at least one direction.
From the five individual networks an overlay network was created by merging orthologous proteins and interactions between orthologous proteins. Orthology relationships were assigned based on Davison [7] . The overlay network was then used to predict interactions between core proteins and to analyze network characteristics.
Overlaps between species were significantly increased compared to random orthology assignments (p-value < 0.001). No significant association between or within functional groups was observed using Fisher's exact test. As tegument proteins have a reputation of being sticky, we compared for each species the number of interactions of tegument proteins against all other proteins using the Mann-Whitney U test. We did not observe a significant difference in the amount of interaction partners of tegument proteins compared to other proteins for any of the five viruses which argues against tegument proteins being merely sticky in this study.