This paper attempts to understand optimal ventilation rates at the national level across 26 European countries and to contrast the benefits of optimizing ventilation with filtration of outdoor air pollution and control of indoor sources. This is an important topic given the key role of the housing sector in tackling both air pollution and climate change. Although the methods used are relatively simplistic, they are appropriate for analyses performed at the scale presented in the paper. The findings and conclusions are well supported by the results. I would therefore support publication. However, I believe the manuscript would benefit from a stronger statement of the aims of the work and some clarifications regarding the methods (see below).
• I found some parts of the description of the risk model confusing, in particular towards the bottom of page 7. Firstly, the text states that the models are based on a predefined population attributable burden of disease for each exposure and disease. Is this simply referring to the calculation described later in the section (bottom of page 8)? Secondly, the text then states that "national estimates are then calculated from the national burden of disease data by scaling the attributable fraction according to the ratio of national versus European indoor concentration estimates for each pollutant". I'm afraid I could not follow the point being made here. Which "European" estimates are being referred to?
• On page 8 it is stated that "Traditional risk assessment methods estimate these [mortality and morbidity] separately as numbers of cases". I don't really agree with this statement. There are many health impact assessment methods which can consider both together and which are not incidence-based.
• The source of the data presented in Table 2 was not clear to me. Do these values relate to previous work by the authors? The source(s) used should be explained and appropriate references provided.
• The section describing the basis for the assumed source control levels (page 11) can be improved.
Although the authors provide an explanation of the methods that can be used to achieve such source control for each pollutant, it is not clear how the specific reduction % was decided upon in each case. Are the reductions based on evidence or just plausible best guesses? For example, how do you know that implementing compulsory alarms will reduce CO sources by exactly 90%?
The section would benefit from additional references to supporting literature.
• I do not understand why the source control scenario (scenario 3) did not also include an element of ventilation optimization. The start of the section describing the scenarios suggests that ventilation optimization would be "complemented" first by filtration and then by source control (page 9). This suggests that a ventilation optimization component would appear in all scenarios. Choosing just one "optimal" ventilation rate makes it difficult to ascertain the relative benefits due to ventilation and source control.
• There is a line on page 14 which states "substantial reductions have been proposed in the earlier work within the EU funded IAIAQ project". It is not clear what reductions are being referred to here. Is it reductions in the burden of disease due to indoor exposures? Why have reductions been proposed?
• The term "EU-26" is used throughout the paper and should be defined somewhere.
• There are two occasions where references are missing in the text (bottom of page 8 and below Table 3 ).
Dear Sotiris Please find my detailed comments on the attachment and my review below:
The manuscript "Healthy-Polis 1476-069X-14-S1-S6" focusses on the calculation of the annual burden of disease caused by exposure to indoor air pollution. This is very important work, given that the indoor environment is greatly ignored in relation to health.
The MS is generally well written and certainly merits publication.
Apart from some minor editing, as indicated in the attachment, my comments mainly aim to improve the reader's understanding. The areas requiring clarification are highlighted in the attachment together with some comments. The two most important ones are as follows:
1. Methods: My understanding is that the exposure analysis refers only to indoor exposure in the residential environment, without considering any time spent outdoors or in other indoor microenvironments; however, this is not clear in the text. Can you please clarify what the building stock represents.
2. The section on the "Risk model" directs the reader to several references of previous work. However, the reader may not be familiar with these methodologies and, most importantly, this significant part of the paper should stand alone. To enable a more friendly reading, the authors are kindly required to provide the data used in the methodology, step by step, as supplementary data (i.e. BoD, national estimates/statistics, PAF etc).This would improve a lot the quality and value of this publication. 
Framework for developing European health-based ventilation guidelines was created in 2010-2013 in the EU-funded HEALTHVENT project. As a part of the project potential of efficient control policies to reduce the burden of disease caused by indoor exposures was estimated. Analysis was based on scenario comparison using a model, which was based on mass-balance framework and changes in ventilation level.
The quantitative comparison of three main policy approaches, (i) changing ventilation rates only; (ii) filtration of outdoor air; and (iii) indoor source control, showed that all three approaches are able to provide substantial reductions in the health risks varying from approximately 20% to 44%, corresponding to 400 000 and 900 000 saved healthy life years in EU-26.
-3 -
Health effects of indoor air exposures can be decreased by increasing ventilation and the present modelling shows that controlling indoor air sources plays a major role when selecting appropriate ventilation rate. In a case where indoor sources cannot be removed or their emissions cannot be limited to an accepted level, ventilation needs to be increased to remove remaining pollutants. In these cases outdoor air pollution become the major source of pollution in indoors, and it needs to be taken into account.
Particulate matter, mainly coming from outdoors to indoors, is the main cause of health effects of indoor exposures in all European countries.
In the period 2006-2010, focus on indoor air quality has been raised by WHO, who has issued specific guidelines addressing air exposure in indoor spaces [1, 2] infections, asthma, allergy, and short-term sick leaves), and an association between ventilation and productivity (performance of office work) was indicated.
Similar results were obtained in the review by Seppänen et al. (2004) [7] . They None of the studies included in the reviews specifically addressed the role of outdoor air quality on indoor exposures, even though 90% of EU citizens live in areas where the WHO guidelines for air quality for PM 2.5 is not met [10] . Neither was the existence of indoor air sources systematically analysed nor exposure levels quantified or considered when associating ventilation and health. Therefore the support from these previous studies on determining the best combination of source control and ventilation levels is limited. This work aims to summarize the current understanding of the sources of health risks in indoor environments and their relationship to ventilation requirements. The methods presented here allow for informed health-based optimization of efforts aimed at reducing harmful exposures and improving health of the occupants. The results are intended for development of national and international guidelines and standards, and can also be used as background information when
analysing indoor air quality related issues in buildings.
-6 -
Ventilation plays a dual role in formation of indoor pollutant concentrations: on one hand it removes pollutants generated indoors from indoor spaces by ventilating the space with outdoor air, on the other hand, ventilation introduces outdoor air pollutants indoors [11, 12] . Assuming a constant outdoor pollution level and constant penetration efficiency, increasing ventilation directly leads to increased indoor exposures to outdoor pollutants. Even in the case of efficient filtering of particles in the intake air, detailed studies have shown that a substantial fraction of the outdoor air enters indoors via windows, doors, ventilation ducts, and cracks and leaks in the building envelope, leading to much lower actual filtration efficiency [13] .
Due to the counter-acting roles of indoor and outdoor air sources on indoor exposures, a mass-balance model is needed to address it when defining prevailing indoor concentrations. A commonly used approach based on Dockery and Spengler [14] and adopted in Hänninen et al. [11] , [15] is as follows:
where C i is the total indoor concentration (µg m -3 ) of the pollutant in question, C a is the concentration in the intake air, P is the probability of the pollutant remaining suspended after penetrating through the building envelope, α is air exchange rate (h -1 ), k is the deposition rate of the pollutant indoors (h -1 ), G is the indoor generation level (µg h -1 ), V is the volume and t is the temperature of the indoor space. The third term covering the transient impacts of changing concentration can be considered zero for the sake of long-term average exposures. Detailed input data and more details of calculations are presented in Hänninen and Asikainen (2013) [16] .
Because the aim of this study is to estimate how changes in ventilation affect exposures, the probability distributions of national ventilation rates in a building stock of year 2010 had to be estimated. Surprisingly limited data of measured ventilation rates are available for European countries. Due to this, available measured data was reviewed and a regression model was created combining the climatological and economical differences in the building stocks with ventilation rates. Further modelling with a Bayesian subjective probability approach was used for generation of lognormal probability distributions for ventilation rates in each EU-26 country ( Table 1 , method described in detailed elsewhere [17] ). Table 1 .
Large number of indoor air pollutants has been associated with health responses, but some of those either play a small role from the point of view of public health, or pose challenges for the exposure assessment or quantification of the burden of disease.
Health determinants of housing in general are discussed in WHO 2011 [18] , safe levels of specific chemicals indoors in WHO 2010 [2] and guidelines for exposure to dampness and mould specifically in WHO 2009 [1] . The current enhancement of the health impact assessment with the above described mass-balance approach to account for variable ventilation is built on the previous achievements of EnVIE [19] and IAIAQ projects [20] and the corresponding models for environmental burden of disease caused by indoor air quality. These models were based on a predefined population attributable burden of disease (BoD) for each exposure and disease and national estimates are then calculated from the national burden of disease data by scaling the attributable fraction according to the ratio of national versus European -8 -indoor concentration estimates of each pollutant. (i.e. PM 2.5 , outdoor bioaerosols, VOC, carbon oxide (CO) radon and dampness). In the current work the earlier PM 2.5 , radon and dampness models were updated to the relative risk-based population attributable fraction (PAF) approach but keeping the IAIAQ disease classification. In addition, second hand smoke exposures at home were added using exposure data from a European survey [21] .
Exposures to environmental pollutants are associated with increased mortality and morbidity. Traditional risk assessment methods estimate these separately as numbers of cases. The results from such incidence-based models are not comparable over different types of health endpoints and to improve comparability of impacts on various types of diseases and including mortality, disability adjusted life years (DALY) has been proposed as a common metric [22] . (Table 1 ) and calculating the population attributable fraction (PAF) as [Error! Reference source not found.]:
where f is the fraction of population exposed to a given factor and RR is the relative risk of the exposed population. Now if the background burden of disease (BoD) is known the environmental burden of disease (EBD) caused by the current exposures ( Table 3 . Table 2 . Table 3 .
Three alternative exposure control scenarios were evaluated using the mass-balance enhanced burden of disease model to evaluate their efficiency to reduce BoD. The exposure control scenarios start from optimizing the ventilation rates only. As it proves inefficient, it is complemented firstly with control of filtration of outdoor pollutants and secondly with control of indoor sources.
The first exposure reduction scenario is defined as finding the health-based optimum ventilation rate without any other actions that change indoor or outdoor sources. In this scenario the pollutant concentrations from indoor and outdoor sources compete so that pollutants from indoor sources are decreasing and pollutants from the outdoor sources are increasing when the ventilation rate is increased. The health-based -10 -optimum level of ventilation is solved for each country among EU-26 by calculating burden of disease with ventilation rates from 0.1 to 50 lps pp.
The calculations assume that all indoor originating exposures follow the mass-balance dilution even though this is not self-evident for several indoor originating pollutants, especially radon, dampness, mould and carbon monoxide. Radon infiltrates typically from the soil below the buildings, and the infiltration may react to the under pressure indoors, which may increase in some ventilation systems at higher ventilation rates.
Dampness may also be created by condensation and may thus increase at higher ventilation rates. Carbon monoxide is lethal at high exposure levels and more efficient dilution by higher ventilation may not be sufficient. However, for all these pollutants the benefits of higher ventilation rates are calculated assuming the mass-balance for a constant source term.
Previous analyses of the sources of indoor exposures have shown that outdoor air is a significant source of exposures. Therefore the second scenario was determined as an attempt to control the burden of disease by filtration the exposures originating from outdoor air. Because both ultrafine and coarse particles and chemically reactive pollutants like ozone have lower infiltration factors than PM 2.5 , dominated by accumulation mode particles, the filtration was specified for PM 2.5 particles.
Three levels of filtration were compared. The baseline estimates assume that 90% of the outdoor PM 2.5 mass concentration penetrates indoors. In addition, realistic but increasingly challenging penetration levels of 70% and 50% were evaluated. These correspond to effective filtration of PM 2.5 mass concentration by 27% and 45%, respectively, filtration levels that can be achieved in real buildings at least when using mechanical ventilation systems [13] . When discussing the filtration efficiencies of filters and the above mentioned penetration efficiencies, it has to be noted that the -11 -penetration efficiency is defined for the building, accounting for leaks and ventilation from windows, doors etc.
The health-based optimum ventilation was defined in this scenario also, and used when calculating the burden of disease results and the reduction potential compared to the baseline scenario.
The third approach to optimizing ventilation for health focuses first on indoor sources of exposures. Now, instead of attempting to dilute these sources as they are, they are first assumed to be controlled by other means as much as technically feasible before optimizing the ventilation for health. The assumed control potentials for the considered pollutants were:
• -90% for radon, carbon monoxide (CO) and second hand smoke (SHS)
• -50% for volatile organic compounds (VOC) and dampness • -25% for particulate matter (PM 2.5 )
These hypothetical source controls were defined to approach maximum technically feasible reductions. The radon estimate assumes efficient application and control of radon safe construction in radon-prone areas combined with control of second hand smoke exposures known to act synergistically with radon. Efficient second hand smoke reductions have already been demonstrated in Finland in both workplaces and in homes resulting a decrease in proportion of adolescents exposed to SHS from 17% in 1991 to 6% in 2009 [25] and the SHS policies are moving forward also on at European level. The carbon monoxide controls were aimed to be implemented by compulsory alarms that will allow for identification of malfunctioning devices before the risks occur.
VOC controls can be reached by comprehensive labelling systems for low emission products. Dampness controls need to combine structural improvements with -12 -active/online and passive warning sensors. The most challenging element was considered to be particulate matter. The proposed 25% reduction can be achieved with target exhausts in kitchens, avoiding use of candles and improved design of combustion devices.
To provide some sensitivity analysis to estimate the effectiveness of source control, two other scenarios with lower and higher source control capabilities were also analysed. In the lower source control scenario (scenario 3.1) it was assumed a reduction of 80% for radon, CO and SHS and 25% reduction of PM 2.5 , VOC and dampness exposures. In the higher source control scenario (scenario 3.2) a total control (100%) of radon, CO and SHS and 75% reduction of PM 2.5 , VOC and dampness exposures were assumed.
In all source control scenarios the ventilation level was set to be 4 lps pp, which was defined as base ventilation rate in cases when ventilation must handle only human bio-effluent emissions (carbon dioxide (CO 2 ) and moisture) by work done in HealthVent to define the health based ventilation requirements [26] .
Exposures to indoor and outdoor originating pollutants were associated with a burden 
Overall in EU-26, over 50% of the total annual burden of disease associated with indoor exposures (4000 DALYs/million) is estimated to be caused by PM 2.5 originating from outdoor air, followed by particles from indoor sources, and radon ( Figure 3) .
The contribution of different sources to the total DALYs varies between countries.
This can be seen when comparing the sources of the burden of disease in Finland ( Figure 3 ) and in other EU-26 countries (Table 4 ) with the population-weighted mean of EU-26 countries. It is readily apparent that in Finland the role of ambient particles is lower than in Europe in general, but that both bio-aerosols (pollen) and radon play much more significant roles. Especially the contribution of radon is double to that of the European average, highlighting the geology peculiarities of the Finnish soil.
-14 -However, in Finland the burden of disease from lung cancer caused by radon exposures is alleviated partly by lower smoking prevalence. On average, 31% of over 15-year olds smoke daily or occasionally in EU countries and the smoking figures are lower only in Finland (25%), Sweden (25%) and Slovakia (22%) [21] .
Dampness and mould problems continuously raise a lot of attention in Finland, too.
Nevertheless, the burden of disease in Finland is from the lower end on the European scale (ranging from 1% to 11%), and only 3% is estimated to be caused by dampness in comparison with average of 5% in EU-26. 
The burden of disease caused by indoor exposures, estimated above to be over 4 000
DALYs per year per a population of 1 million in EU-26, is significant. However, also substantial reductions have been proposed in the earlier work within the EU funded IAIAQ project [20] . The three alternative scenarios (and two additional source control scenarios) described earlier were tested to support policy development for controlling the risks and reducing the burden. The overall comparison of these scenarios in EU-26 is presented in Figure 4 . The achievable health benefits were 20% for the dilution scenario, 38% for the filtration scenario, and 44% for the indoor source control scenario (changing from 41% to 54% depending on assumed source reductions). (Table   1 ) [16, 17] .
Approximately twice as high benefits are achievable by filtration of outdoor air in However, largest health benefits can be achieved by the source control approach (scenario 3.0), which significantly reduces the need to control exposures by dilution.
The benefits are approximately 44% from the baseline, or 940 000 DALYs in EU-26, and changing from reduction of 41% (865 000 DALY) with lower source control assumptions to 57% (1.21 million DALY) with higher source control assumptions, demonstrating source control to be more effective than dilution or filtration even with smaller reductions of source exposures.
In addition to of higher health benefits, in comparison with the filtration-based scenario 2 the advantage is that with source control the lower dilution need (i.e.
-16 -enabling lower ventilation rate) allow also for lower infiltration of outdoor particles and therefore the feasibility of the approach is better in the current building stock.
Moreover, with lower ventilation rates require the source control approach is likely to prove also more energy-efficient.
Further analysis of the contribution of indoor and outdoor sources on these scenarios shows, that with the dilution scenario the health benefits are not only due to smaller proportion of the indoor contribution (i.e. the dilution of the pollutants from the indoor sources) but is mainly based on the lower ventilation rates that actually limits the penetration of the outdoor pollutants to indoors.
In the filtration scenario the health benefits are due to filtration of the outdoor pollutants and also effective dilution of the indoor pollutants as the health-based optimal ventilation levels are higher.
Also in the source control scenarios the health benefits are a result of both effects;
firstly by the lower indoor sources due to the source control and secondly by lower penetration of outdoor pollutants due to low level of ventilation.
The results suggest that (i) there is a substantial burden of disease associated with exposures through inhalation taking place indoors and that (ii) these risks can Largest health benefits were projected for the source control policies. It is obvious that the benefits are achievable only if the source controls work as efficiently as proposed and that the efficiency of the source controls must be confirmed with follow-up (e.g. auditing) of exposure levels after the policy enforcement.
-19 -
Over 2 million disability adjusted life years (DALY) are annually lost in the European Union due to compromised indoor air quality, but this burden of disease can be reduced by adjusting ventilation, filtration of intake air and by controlling indoor sources. All three approaches are able to provide substantial reductions in the health risks from approximately 20 % to almost 50%, corresponding to 400 000 and 900 000
saved DALYs in EU-26. Thus selection of strategies has substantial impact on the expected benefits.
The projected health benefits can be achieved if the controls on ventilation and sources are fully implemented as defined in the scenario descriptions. In the case of selecting some of the proposed strategies for implementation, a careful follow-up plan has to be developed for ensuring that the controls are effective and match the requirements of the benefit calculations. -28 - 