Supplement to: Nishiura H: Early efforts in modeling the incubation period of infectious diseases with an acute course of illness. In: Emerging Themes in Epidemiology.
In the Australian dataset [A1], onset of 64, 17, 5 and 2 cases was respectively observed on the 1st, 2nd, 3rd and 4th day of voyage, i.e., after departure, on documented ships. No influenza case developed symptoms on or after the 5th day of voyage, and the observed cases were thought to have been exposed to influenza before departure. Although the original data for the 1st day of voyage (i.e., 64 cases) partly included cases who developed the disease in port, it was assumed that their onset information was equivalent to that of those who developed the disease on the 1st day at sea [A2] . The duration of each voyage was assumed to be sufficiently longer than the incubation period of influenza (e.g., more than 5 days).
Let p be the probability of developing the disease per day after exposure, which Dr. McKendrick referred to as the "fundamental probability", the daily frequency of the incubation period, Z r , at r days after exposure is given by:
where the sum of the frequencies is up to 1 for all possible dates, i.e., Z 1 + Z 2 + Z 3 +··· = 1. All values of Z 1 should represent the 64 cases who developed the disease on the 1st day of voyage, Z 2 those who developed the disease on the 1st or 2nd day of voyage, and, in the same way, Z 3 those who developed the disease on the 1st, 2nd or 3rd day. That is, when it is only known that exposure happened before departure, Z r has r different and equal possible dates for development of the disease after departure.
Let N be the total number of observed cases, the number of cases, G k , k days after departure (as shown in Figure 1 in the main text) is given by:
for k = 1, 2 and 3. Recalling that
Since G k is known (i.e., G 1 = 64, G 2 = 17 and so on), numerical solutions for Z r and p can be obtained arithmetically (i.e., Z 1 = 0.727, Z 2 = 0.189, Z 3 = 0.054, Z 4 = 0.014 and p = 0.727). Table S1 shows the expected values obtained using this method, revealing no significant deviations from the observed data (χ 2 3 = 0.11, p = 0.99). Using the estimated Z r , Dr. McKendrick suggested that the mean incubation period was 32.71
hours. In other words, paying close attention to the unknown time of exposure in the given data, his pioneering work reasonably estimated the incubation period of pandemic influenza, which, even to date, has yet to be fully clarified. Here I digest the value of Dr. McKendrick's work a little more using a lognormal distribution, f(τ), for an incubation period of length τ. Let the time of departure be 0 and the observation dates be t days after departure, the frequency given in Figure 1 in the main text is a consequence of what we considered all possible times of exposure from negative infinity to zero. Thus, the frequency is generalized as:
This can be rearranged as follows:
where F(t) is the cumulative distribution function of the incubation period. That is, the implicit assumption of Dr. McKendrick that all theoretically possible times of exposure be considered indicates that I have to assume the frequency of onset as being the complementary cumulative distribution function (CCDF). The maximum likelihood estimates of µ and σ for f(t) are obtained by minimizing binomial deviance between the CCDF in the above eqn.(S9) and observed frequency, yielding µ and CV of 0.292 log(days) (1.339 days) and 53.149 %, respectively. No significant deviation was revealed between the observed and expected frequencies (Table S1 ). The resulting incubation period distribution is shown in Figure S1 . The obtained frequency distribution of Spanish flu.