The binding site residues' properties are represented by means of pseudocenters for comparisons using Cavbase [1, 2] and RAPMAD [3] (Rapid Pocket Matching using Distances).
The physicochemical properties of binding site residue atoms -as detected by an implementation of the pocket detection approach LIGSITE [4] -are assigned with the following types: hydrogen bond acceptor or donor, mixed hydrogen bond acceptor/donor, center of an aromatic ring, π electron center, aliphatic moiety, and metal ion. First, the pseudocenters are matched to identify suitable superposition possibilities while the following step transforms the pseudocenters into undirected graphs. The overlap of the final match is calculated by using the number of matching surface points within a distance of 1 Å (Cavbase similarity). In contrast, in RAPMAD the pseudocenters are divided into seven property subsets and the centroid and pseudocenter that is closest to this centroid are determined for each set. The Euclidean distances of those two reference points to all pseudocenters enables the generation of distance histograms with a bin size of 0.4 Å for comparison. The tool returns a distance score for the compared cavities (RAPMAD distance) based on the histogram distributions. The outcome of both methods was shown to be comparable with respect to classification performance. Both methods can solely be applied to binding sites.
For FuzCav [5] comparisons, the Cα atom coordinates of binding site residues are labelled with six pharmacophoric properties (hydrogen bond acceptor and donor, positive and negative ionizable, aromatic, aliphatic). The final fingerprint representation encodes all unique pharmacophore triplets together with the binned Cα atom distances (0-4.8, 4.8-7.2, 7.2-9.5, 9.5-11.9, 11.9-14.3 Å). A fingerprint for 4,833 possible triplets is used for comparison. The final score is calculated by dividing the number of common fingerprint strings by the minimum number of non-zero fingerprint strings of the compared binding sites (FuzCav similarity).
In PocketMatch [6] , the binding site residues are grouped according to their physicochemical properties (0: Ala, Val, Ile, Leu, Gly, Pro; 1: Lys, Arg, His; 2: Asp, Asn, Glu, Gln; 3: Tyr, Phe, Trp; 4: Cys, Ser, Thr) and are represented by three types of points (Cα, Cβ, Ccentroid -the geometric center of the side chain atoms). A binning of all pairs of point distances (group-type pairs and point-type pairs) enables a subsequent comparison and alignment of pairs of sorted distance sequences. The scoring scheme recommended by the developers consists in dividing the number of distance pair matches by the total number of distance pairs of the larger cavity (PMScoremax). Additionally, the PMScoremin is returned which takes the total number of distance pairs of the smaller cavity into account.
The description of the binding site used by SiteAlign [7] includes topological properties (distance Cβ -sphere center, side chain orientation, size) and physicochemical properties (hydrogen bond acceptor or donor, charge, aromatic, aliphatic). They are projected on a discretized 80 triangle sphere with its origin in the cavity center by deriving a geometrical vector from the Cα atom of each binding site residue to the sphere center. The descriptors are mapped on the respective triangle to derive a binding site fingerprint. The alignment thrives to optimize the number of possible similarities between both sites. For the final scoring, normalized similarities per triangle and descriptor are calculated and finally averaged for each triangle. Four distances (d1, d2, d3, d4) are calculated by subtracting the following similarities from 1: the triangle similarity sum which is divided by the number of non-zero triangles for one of both sites (s1), the number of non-zero triangles for both sites (s2), the number of nonzero triangles which lead to local distances smaller than or equal to 0.2 for both sites (s3), and the number of non-zero triangles with polar character for both sites (s4). Due to the underlying methodology, this method should not be applied to compare binding sites to proteins.
The previously developed method SOIPPA (Sequence Order Independent Profile-Profile Alignments) [8] constitutes the basis for SMAP [9] . A mesh surface is generated by a Delaunay S3 triangulation of the binding site's Cα atoms. Each Cα atom is assigned a normal vector that is perpendicular to the surface. Moreover, a PSI-BLAST [10] search is conducted to derive a position-specific scoring matrix and assign a probability distribution to each Cα atom. The annotated ligand binding site is finally represented as encoded graph based on the regular tessellation. The McLachlan [11] similarity matrix is used to describe the physicochemical and evolutionary relationship of the matched cavities and the angle and distance between two matched atoms is used as geometric quality criterion. The resulting score (raw score) is returned together with the RMSD, the template and query coverage, and the Tanimoto coefficient which describes the ratio of the overlapping pocket volume and the union pocket volumes of both sites. In contrast to SOIPPA, a statistical model implemented in SMAP assists to assess the statistical significance of a match by the calculation of p-values on the basis of an extreme value distribution. The method is applicable toward local binding site similarities as well as those between cavities and complete proteins.
Although TM-align [12] was developed to superpose protein structures, the method's successful application in various site comparison scenarios led to the inclusion of the method in our analysis. The comparison is based on the Cα coordinates and the underlying secondary structures elements based on the DSSP (dictionary of protein secondary structure) definition [13] . The TM-score does not consider the physicochemical nature of the matched residues. It represents the sum of distances between aligned residues after optimal spatial superposition. It is noteworthy that the algorithm is sequence order dependent, i.e. a discontinuous alignment of binding site residues cannot be achieved. For SiteHopper [17] comparisons, a ligand-occupied cavity is represented as a 3D shape that is "colored" by chemical properties of the underlying binding site residues. This is achieved with the help of the Shape [18] and Spicoli [19] toolkits of OpenEye. After the alignment of binding site patches the maximum overlap of atom-centered Gaussian functions is calculated.
The final so-called Patch Score combines a measure for physicochemical similarity (ColorTanimoto) and a measure to estimate the surface shape similarity (ShapeTanimoto). The software enables a comparison of protein pockets, but does not support the comparison of pockets against protein structures or vice versa. In a recent publication it was shown that the tool is also applicable to newly identified binding sites. [20] VolSite is used to generate the binding site representation used for a comparison using Shaper [21] . A cube is placed at the ligand's center of mass and filled with a grid. 
The software IsoMIF [22] is based on molecular interaction fields (MIFs) which describe the putative interactions of binding site residues with ligand atoms. Pockets are detected by the GetCleft [23] algorithm which transforms the cavity into a grid with a 0.5 Å spacing with a distance of 2.5 to 4.0 Å to any protein non-hydrogen atom. Moreover, cavities can be defined by a bound ligand. Each grid point is labelled by the interaction potential energy for six different chemical probes (hydrophobic, aromatic, hydrogen bond acceptor or donor, positively S6 or negatively charged). Protein atom types are assigned according to the original SYBYL atom types [24] and an additional n.his atom type for the histidine nitrogen atoms that can exist in different protonation states (hydrogen bond acceptor and donor). Based on a given probe interaction energy threshold, probes in the vertices are neglected or retained. For donor and acceptor probes as well as aromatic interactions, additional threshold angles were introduced.
The final MIF is the set of interaction vectors at all vertex positions within the grid. The similarity score is calculated as the Tanimoto similarity based on the number of common probes and the number of energetically significant probes for each of the two binding sites.
Additionally, an RMSD value is given. In addition to the Tanimoto similarity (tani), a match is characterized by three further similarity scores (taniM, taniMW, and taniNormNodes). to provide unique codes. An additional fuzziness was introduced by setting more than one bit in the fingerprint for one pharmacophore triplet, i.e. three distance are encoded for each of the three feature distances. This leads to 27 bits which represent one triplet. A modified Tanimoto coefficient according to Fligner et al. [26] was introduced as similarity measure to reduce the size bias.
Protein and ligand atoms are assigned seven pharmacophoric properties (hydrogen bond acceptor or donor, hydrophobic, aromatic, positive or negative ionizable, metal) for a comparison with TIFP (Interaction Fingerprint Triplets) [27] . The detection of interactions is based on geometric rules including distance and angle thresholds. The interactions are: hydrophobic (hydrophobic -hydrophobic), face-to-face and edge-to-face (aromatic -aromatic), hydrogen bonds and weak hydrogen bonds ((weak) donor -(weak) acceptor), ionic (anioncation), π-cation (cation -aromatic) and metal coordination (metal -acceptor). The overall interaction pattern comprises the two interacting atoms of protein and ligand as well as 