Samples were collected as part of a long-term IAV surveillance study (1, 2) . A combination or oropharyngeal and cloacal samples were collected using a sterile-tipped swab and were placed in viral transport media (VTM, Brain-heart infusion broth containing 2x106 122 U/l penicillin, 0.2 mg/ml streptomycin, 0.5 mg/ml gentamicin, 500 U/ml amphotericin B, Sigma).
Samples were kept cool immediately following collection (4-12C), and subsequently placed at -80C for long-term storage. We used the bioinformatics pipeline reported in (3) (4) (5) . Accordingly, sequence reads were demultiplexed and trimmed with Trimmomatic, and contigs were de novo assembled using Trinity (6) . No filtering of host/bacterial reads was performed before assembly. All assembled contigs were compared to the entire nonredundant nucleotide (nt) and protein (nr) database using blastn and diamond blast (7), respectively, setting an e-value threshold of 1 × 10 −10 to remove potential false positives. Abundance estimates for all contigs were determined using the RSEM algorithm implemented in Trinity. (Table S1 ). There was no significant correlation between RNA concentration and the number of reads, contigs or abundance demonstrating such that this was not a source of bias ( Fig S1) .
Contigs were annotated, and phylogenetic trees inferred as per (3) . Briefly, contigs greater than 1000bp in length were inspected using Geneious R10 (Biomatters, New Zealand), and open reading frames corresponding to predicted genome architectures based on the closest reference genomes were interrogated. Reads were subsequently mapped back to viral contigs to identify mis-assembly using bowtie2 (8) . Viruses with full length genomes, or incomplete genomes that possess the full-length RNA-dependant RNA polymerase (RdRp) gene, were used for phylogenetic analysis. Sequences of the polyprotein or gene encoding for the RdRp were aligned using MAFFT (9) , and gaps and ambiguously aligned regions were stripped using trimAL (10). Final alignment lengths for each data set are presented in Table S2 . The most appropriate amino acid substitution model was then determined for each data set, and maximum likelihood trees were estimated using PhyML 3.0 (11) with 1000 bootstrap replicates. Novel viral species were identified as those that had <90% RdRp protein identity, or <80% genome identity to previously described viruses.
We used diversity metrics commonly used in microbial community ecology to understand composition and the factors that may drive variation in the composition of avian viromes.
The alpha-diversity and beta-diversity indices are measures of within-and between-sample diversity, respectively, and have been associated with various ecological traits and biological phenotypes since the first influential human or environmental metagenomics studies (e.g. (12, 13) . Although often associated with microbiome research, they have also been employed in viral ecology (e.g. (14) (15) (16) , and we extend their use here. Figure S1 . Correlation of laboratory and sequencing metrics. Correlation between pooled sample RNA concentration, number of paired reads generated, number of contigs, total viral abundance and avian viral abundances. Where there are significant correlations between total viral abundance and avian viral abundance, and the number of paired reads and number of contigs generated, there is no statistically significant correlation (presented as asterisks) between starting RNA concentration and any sequencing metric. Metrics used are presented in Table S1 . Figure S4 ). Group 3 is not shown as there are no full genomes available, but is presented in Figure S4 . The sequences generated in this study are indicated by a filled circle and are in bold. The tree is midpoint rooted for clarity only. Bootstrap values >70% are shown for key nodes. The scale bar indicates the number of amino acid substitutions per site. Partial gammacoronavirus and deltacoronavirus phylogenies, allowing for the inclusion of numerous wild bird sequences, are presented in Figure S10 and S11, respectively. Abundance of viral genera in each library and (B) relative abundance of viral genera in each library. (C) Alpha diversity metrics calculated for each library and (D) for avian order. Differences in alpha diversity between Anseriiformes and Charadriiformes were calculated using a linear model following a box-cox transformation. In panels C and D samples from Charadriiformes are in green and from Anseriiformes in blue. Viral species and abundances are presented in Table S3 . Figure S12 and S13. Figure S25 . Co-phylogeny demonstrating a discordance between host phylogenetic relationships and virome composition. The host phylogeny was inferred using the cytochrome B gene. The virome composition phylogram was generated by clustering of the Bray-Curtis dissimilarity matrix. Dotted lines between the two phylograms are either green or blue, representing either a Charadriiform or Anseriform species, respectively The relationship was tested using two discordance metrics: Robinson-Foulds and nPH85, where 1 is discordance and 0 is agreement. Figure S26 . Co-phylogeny demonstrating the discordance between host phylogenetic relationships and virome composition. Host phylogenetic relationships were inferred using the cytochrome B gene. The phylogram of virome composition was generated by clustering of Bray-Curtis dissimilarity matrix. The virome composition phylogram comprises black solid lines between Grey Teal, Pink-eared Duck and Australian Shelduck as viral species were shared between these libraries. As no other libraries shared any viral species, the libraries are connected with grey dashed lines on the phylogram. Dotted lines between the two phylograms are either green or blue, representing either a Charadriiform or Anseriform species, respectively. The relationship was tested using two discordance metrics: Robinson-Foulds and nPH85, where 1 is discordance and 0 is agreement.