located in South Korea. The rectal swabs were soaked in PBS buffer supplemented with penicillin G (10,000 IU/mL) and streptomycin (2 mg/mL) and centrifuged at 2,000 ×g for 15 min to collect the supernatant fluids. The supernatant fluids were stored at -80°C until used. For RNA extraction, we used TRIzol Reagent (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA, USA) following the manufacturer's instructions.
Briefly, the supernatant (200 μL) containing PEDV was mixed with 1 mL of TRIzol Reagent. Then, 200 μL of chloroform was added to the mixture, and the suspension was centrifuged for 15 min at 10,000 ×g. The RNA-containing aqueous phase was precipitated with the same volume isopropanol, maintained at -20°C for 1 h, and centrifuged for 15 min at 10,000 ×g. The resulted RNA pellet was washed with 1 mL of 75% (v/v) absolute ethanol, centrifuged for 15 min at 10,000 ×g and dried, and resuspended in 30 μL of nuclease-free water. We used the specific primer set for N (nucleocapsid) and M (membrane protein) genes (1, 2). RT-PCR was performed using iScript TM One-Step RT-PCR Kit with SYBR® Geen (BioRad) following the manufacturer's instructions. RT-PCR products were visualized via electrophoresis in a 1~2% (w/v) agarose gel containing ethidium bromide. Bands of the correct size were estimated on agarose gel (Fig. S5 ). Operational taxonomic units (OTUs) were determined based on 97% similarity of reads. Blue and red coloring represent the normal and PEDV infected groups, respectively. The bacterial 16S rRNA gene sequences were assigned to each phylum using the mothur package and a reference database of known 16S rRNA genes obtained from the Ribosomal Database Project.
Inner and outer circle show PEDV infected group and normal group, respectively. Fig. S4 . OTU-based weights network reveals modules of OTUs associated with gut microbiota from normal and PEDV infected swine group. Each node represents one OTU and an edge is drawn between OTUs. OTUs were determined based on 97% similarity of reads. Blue, red, and green circle indicate PEDV infected, normal group, and OTU, respectively. Blue and red line denote OTU relationship for normal and PEDV infected swine group, respectively. 