Why is this study being done? This study is funded by the National Science Foundation. This study is designed to help researchers better understand how prepared organizations are for "mass fatality incidents." The findings from this study will help organizations better prepare for mass fatality incidents.
We are particularly interested in learning more about organizations that are directly responsible for preparing for and responding to mass fatality incidents. These groups include: offices of medical examiners, coroners, local and state health departments, offices of emergency management, funeral homes, cemeteries, crematories, faith based organizations and DMORT teams. You are being asked to take part in this study because you are affiliated with one of these groups.
How many people will take part in this study? About 10000 individuals who are involved with fatality management services and/or the death care industry will be asked to complete this survey. They will come from all 10 federal regions throughout the United States.
What are my rights if I take part in this study? Taking part in this study is completely your choice. If you decide to take part, you will be asked to respond to questions about preparedness for mass fatality incidents. You can stop at any time, by simply closing the webpage. If you decide not to participate, there will be no penalty to you in any way.
How long will I be in this study? This survey should take about 1520 minutes to complete.
What risks are there from participation in this study? The risks are that there could be a loss of security (e.g., data hackers), but we have taken precautions to keep the data secure.
What benefits are there from participation in this study? There will be no direct benefit to you from participating in this study. However, the findings from the study questions may help your organization better prepare for a mass fatality incident.
Will information about me be kept private?
The survey and all of the study's records are completely confidential. Only the Principal Investigator and the project coordinator will have the access to any identifying information. All survey data will be password protected and backed up daily to offsite locations. Organizations such as the UCSF Committee on Human Research and the National Science Foundation may look at and/or copy the study research records for various reasons. However, all of this study's information is completely deidentified.
What are the costs of taking part in this study? There are no costs for taking part in this study.
Will I be paid for taking part in this study? There is no payment for taking part in this study.
If you have any questions concerning this study or your participation in it, please contact the Principal Investigator, Dr. Robyn Gershon, by email at robyn.gershon@ucsf.edu. If you have any questions about your rights as a participant in this 2. Consent Form study, you may discuss them with the University of California, San Francisco Committee on Human Research at 415 4761814 for further information.
By clicking "Next," I am confirming that: 1) I am 18 years of age or older. 2) I have never taken this survey before. 3) I understand that my participation in this study is voluntary and that I can leave the survey at any time without prejudice by navigating away from the survey webpage. 4) I agree to enter this research study and I am providing my electronic signature on this consent form.
Mass Fatality Incident Definition: Any situation where more deaths occur in a point in time than can be typically handled by your office. 26. Which organizations/agencies would your agency/office/organization expect to provide resources to during a mass fatality incident? Please check all that apply.
27. Has your agency/office/organization provided training to its staff on your mass fatality plan?
28. Have your agency/office/organization's staff been trained/certified on mass fatality incidents that involve CBRNE (Chemical, Biological, Radiological, Nuclear and highyield Explosives)? 29. Has your agency/office/organization participated in citywide, countywide and/or statewide drills/exercises on mass fatality incidents? 30. Has your agency/office/organization created a staff roster to determine the number of staff that would likely to be able to report for duty during a mass fatality incident? 