Considerable attention has been devoted to the possibility that climate change will exacerbate the burden of mosquito-borne diseases such as malaria and dengue, with important impacts on public health (Githeko et al. 2000) . Early assessments of the effects of climate change on malaria and dengue used simplistic models to assess possible effects of climate change on their basic reproductive numbers (R 0 , the universally recognized metric of the capacity of a parasite or pathogen to reproduce given particular environmental conditions) (Martens et al. 1995; Patz et al. 1998 ). However, these assessments were criticized for giving weight to future increases in R 0 whether or not such increases resulted in R 0 rising above the critical threshold of > 1 for disease persistence (Rogers and Randolph 2000) and for being oversimplistic by only accounting for climate effects rather than the full range of nonclimatic factors that impact the occurrence of these diseases (Reiter 2001; Rogers and Randolph 2000) . Any impact of climate on R 0 of malaria and dengue is limited by the effects of variations in human host density, mosquito control, infection prevention and treatment in humans, and human management of the environment (e.g., agriculture, forest management, logging) that affect the ecology and epidemiology of the vectors, pathogens, and diseases (Githeko et al. 2012) . Consequently, the strength of evidence for recent climate warming effects on malaria risk has been questioned and much debated (Reiter et al. 2004; Tanser et al. 2003) .
Many vector-borne diseases of public health significance (e.g., Lyme disease, West Nile virus) are, however, maintained in transmission cycles that involve wild animal hosts. These cycles are independent of human cases, and the spatio-temporal risk of human disease is less dependent on the direct effects of human activities than is the risk from malaria and dengue. Nevertheless, despite some assessments (Gubler et al. 2001) , the effects of climate change on vector-borne zoonoses have also been downplayed mostly on the basis of limited evidence for recent effects of climate change (Kilpatrick and Randolph 2012) . Lyme disease emerged (or likely reemerged) in the northeastern United States in the late 1970s due to the expansion of tick populations, which was generally thought to have been associated with changes in land use over some decades that resulted in reforestation and expansion of the population of the deer that are key hosts for the ticks (Wood and Lafferty 2013) . Lyme disease is now emerging in Canada and some northern U.S. states due to the northward expansion of the geographic range of the tick vector Ixodes scapularis (I. scapularis) (Hamer et al. 2010; Ogden et al. 2009 ), which is dispersed from source populations by migratory birds and terrestrial hosts (Leighton et al. 2012) .
A mechanistic simulation model of the I. scapularis life cycle has identified temperature effects on I. scapularis population survival in order to assist in assessment of current and future on-the-ground Lyme disease risk in Canada (Ogden et al. 2005 (Ogden et al. , 2006b . Prospective field studies and retrospective analyses of surveillance data on tick and pathogen emergence in southeastern Canada validated the model findings and identified temperature as a statistically significant determinant and possible driver of emergence of the tick in Canada (Bouchard et al. 2013a (Bouchard et al. , 2013b Leighton et al. 2012; Ogden et al. 2008 Ogden et al. , 2010 . The I. scapularis model *These authors are equal first authors.
Background: The extent to which climate change may affect human health by increasing risk from vector-borne diseases has been under considerable debate. oBjectives: We quantified potential effects of future climate change on the basic reproduction number (R 0 ) of the tick vector of Lyme disease, Ixodes scapularis, and explored their importance for Lyme disease risk, and for vector-borne diseases in general. Methods: We applied observed temperature data for North America and projected temperatures using regional climate models to drive an I. scapularis population model to hindcast recent, and project future, effects of climate warming on R 0 . Modeled R 0 increases were compared with R 0 ranges for pathogens and parasites associated with variations in key ecological and epidemiological factors (obtained by literature review) to assess their epidemiological importance. results: R 0 for I. scapularis in North America increased during the years 1971-2010 in spatiotemporal patterns consistent with observations. Increased temperatures due to projected climate change increased R 0 by factors (2-5 times in Canada and 1.5-2 times in the United States), comparable to observed ranges of R 0 for pathogens and parasites due to variations in strains, geographic locations, epidemics, host and vector densities, and control efforts. conclusions: Climate warming may have co-driven the emergence of Lyme disease in northeastern North America, and in the future may drive substantial disease spread into new geographic regions and increase tick-borne disease risk where climate is currently suitable. Our findings highlight the potential for climate change to have profound effects on vectors and vector-borne diseases, and the need to refocus efforts to understand these effects. was modified to permit the direct calculation of R 0 for I. scapularis via the next generation operator approach , which, given the universal use of R 0 and its estimation for a wide range of parasites and pathogens under many different conditions, allowed comparison of R 0 variations in the present study with observed variations for other parasites and pathogens.
Here, we have estimated projected effects of climate change on R 0 of an arthropod vector using a model that has been extensively ground-truthed, and we have assessed the ecological and epidemiological significance of the projected changes in R 0 by comparing them with ranges of R 0 values observed for other parasites and pathogens.
We estimated R 0 under current and future projected climatic conditions at 30 sites in Canada that formed two roughly southnorth transects in Ontario and Quebec, two Canadian provinces where I. scapularis ticks are becoming established. These transects were chosen to capture the climate variability that exists in the region. For simplicity in data presentation, the sites were grouped into clusters [Southern Ontario, Huron Ontario, Upper Southern Ontario, South-Western Quebec, and the Boreal region (see Supplemental Material, Table S1 and Figure S1 )] according to geographic proximity and similarity in temperature conditions (see Supplemental Material, "Variation in temperature and R 0 amongst sites," pp. 2-6, Figures S2-S4) , and mean values for clusters are presented. We also estimated R 0 for two sites in the United States where Lyme disease is endemic in the Northeast and upper Midwest, respectively: Old Lyme (Connecticut), where the human Lyme disease cases were first recognized (Wood and Lafferty 2013) , and Fort McCoy (Wisconsin) (Anderson et al. 1987) .
Modeling R 0. The I. scapularis model is a deterministic model consisting of 12 ordinary differential equations as described by Wu et al. (2013) , based on the mechanistic simulation model described by Ogden et al. (2005) . This model captures the effects of temperature on host-seeking activity and the rates of development from one life stage to the next (effects common to, but variable among, all arthropod vectors), parame terized from field and laboratory studies on I. scapularis. Mortality rates of nonfeeding I. scapularis in Canada and the northeastern United States are similar in summer and winter, presumably due to the insulating effects of the litter layer in woodland habitats (Brunner et al. 2012; Lindsay et al. 1995) . Our analyses operated on the hypothesis that the effects of ambient temperature on I. scapularis population survival are indirect via effects on temperature-dependent rates of development of ticks from one life stage to the next. The lower the temperature, the longer is the tick life cycle and, due to constant daily per capita mortality, the fewer larval ticks survive to become mated adult female ticks. At a threshold temperature, mortality outstrips reproduction and the tick populations die out (or fail to become established)-that is, at this temperature, threshold R 0 falls below unity (Ogden et al. 2005) . At the latitudes under study here, effects of climate change on I. scapularis are expected to be the effect of climate warming on shortening the life cycle, resulting in increasing R 0 (Ogden et al. 2006b ). Quadratic effects of temperature on arthropod vector life history traits are common (Mordecai et al. 2013) , and quadratic effects of temperature on tick activity are included in the model. High temperatures may impact tick survival, causing a northward contraction of the southern range of I. scapularis, resulting in a northward shift, rather than overall expansion, of the geographic range of climatic suitability for I. scapularis (Brownstein et al. 2005) . Here we confined our study to Canada and the main regions of Lyme disease risk in the United States north of 40°N ). Impacts of rainfall on off-host tick survival and on hostseeking activity are considered accounted for in the model in assuming a) tick populations only become established in woodlands where the micro climate is suitable for tick survival, and b) most temperate woodlands types occur where rainfall is sufficient for I. scapularis survival, which is supported by studies in Canada (Lindsay et al. 1995) . Future projections for increased precipitation across much of Canada with climate warming are already being seen to occur (Environment Canada 2013), so rainfall changes are not expected to limit the northward spread of I. scapularis. For the present study, we modified the simulation model of Ogden et al. (2005) in order to calculate R 0 by the next generation operator as described by Wu et al. (2013) . Apart from the temperature values used to calculate tick development and host-finding rates, the values for host numbers (20 deer and 200 rodents) and all other parameter values were those used as starting values by Wu et al. (2013) . R 0 was estimated using mean monthly temperature data for each year and location as described in the following sections. Variations in host abundance affect the final size of the tick population but not the temperature threshold (Ogden et al. 2005) . The temperature threshold would be affected by variations in the mortality rates of ticks in the environment, and slight variations in this have been observed in the field (Ogden et al. 2006a ). For the sensitivity analysis of R 0 to variations in model parameter values, see Supplemental Material, "Model sensitivity analysis," pp. 7-11, Table S2 and Figures S5 and S6 .
Modeling R 0 under current climate. For observed temperatures, we used Australian National University Splines (ANUSPLIN) (Hutchinson et al. 2009 ) of 10-km gridded daily time-series data, which were obtained by thin-plate smoothing spline interpolation of daily climate station observations while accounting for latitude, longitude, and elevation. ANUSPLIN data cover the 40 years that encompass the period of Lyme disease emergence in North America, have coverage across northern North America, and account for missing data by temporal and spatial interpolation. A mean daily near-surface temperature was assigned to the 32 study sites, which were weather stations located over a wide range of the orographic and forest eco systems of Ontario and Quebec or interpolations of ANUSPLIN data for locations in the United States. Monthly mean near-surface air temperatures were used to parameterize the I. scapularis population model for estimating annual values of R 0 for each site, for each year from 1971 to 2010 (see Supplemental Material, "Variation in temperature and R 0 amongst sites," pp. 2-6). Values for annual cumulative degree days > 0°C (DD > 0°C), contemporaneous for each estimated R 0 value, were computed as the accumulation of daily temperature > 0°C for each year for each site. The tick model calculated R 0 for each year using temperature data for that year, but in reality R 0 will depend on the temperature conditions over the 2-to 3-year life cycle of the tick. Therefore, we used the moving average of R 0 over 3 years (that year, the previous year, and the subsequent year) to describe R 0 for each year for each site; so for each site, we obtained a time series for R 0 and DD > 0°C for 38 years and DD > 0°C for 40 years .
Modeling R 0 using projected climate data. An ensemble of modeled temperature data available from three regional climate model (RCM) and two global climate model (GCM) runs were used to estimate future changes in R 0 (see Supplemental Material, "Validation of climate model output," pp. 11-14; Table S3 ). We extracted time series of daily temperature for the 30 Canadian sites from each model. Simulated temperature at a given site was defined as the mean of the closest grid values to that site, increasing confidence in the physical representativeness (Gachon and Dibike 2007) .
We chose bias-corrected output from Canadian RCM CRCM4.2.3, version 4 (Laprise et al. 1997; Music and Caya 2007) to provide temperature data for the I. scapularis model because it relatively accurately and conservatively hindcasted observed ANUSPLIN data in comparison with other climate models and because it provided projected temperatures at a local scale. (Meehl et al. 2000) . For future projections starting in 2001, we chose the A2 scenario (midhigh Green-House-Gas emission scenario) of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change Special Report on Emission Scenarios (Nakicenovic and Swart 2000) because of the availability of regional climate model output using this scenario and because current actual trajectory of emissions corresponded best to this emissions scenario.
Mapping R 0 under current and future climate. We mapped 30-year mean values of R 0 for I. scapularis using observed and projected values. Maps of DD > 0°C for North America north of 40°N and east of the Rocky Mountains were generated using observed data for 1971-2000, and using DD > 0°C projected by bias-corrected CRCM4.2.3 output for the period 2001-2070. We then computed R 0 for each year from the gridded DD > 0°C data using the formula R 0 = 1.072 × 10 -6 DD > 0°C-4.658 × 10 -3 DD > 0°C 2 + 5.556, obtained using observed temperature data as described in Supplemental Material, "Mapping R 0 ,"pp. 15-16, Figure S9 (the threshold for R 0 ≥ 1 was DD > 0°C ≥ 2859.6°C). We then mapped mean 30-year values for R 0 for the periods 1971-2000, 2011-2040, and 2041-2070 (Figure 2 ). Regions west of the Rocky Mountains were masked because it was assumed that I. scapularis will not cross the Rocky Mountains, west of which Lyme disease risk will continue to depend on transmission of Borrelia burgdorferi by the tick I. pacificus (Ogden et al. 2009 ).
Literature search on R 0 ranges for parasite and pathogen systems. There are, to our knowledge, no equivalent estimates of how environmental changes may affect R 0 of vectors. However, to better comprehend the ecological or epidemiological importance of projected changes of R 0 of I. scapularis, we performed a literature review to obtain published estimates of how R 0 for parasites and pathogens varies due to changes in factors already recognized as having ecological or epidemiological importance. These include variations in geographic location, host density, strain or genotype, disease control effort, and variations among different epidemics. Articles were searched in the National Centre for Biotechnology Information PubMed search site (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/) using search terms a) "basic reproduction number," without specifying pathogens or parasites, and then b) "basic reproductive number," repeated with one of the following terms: tick, mosquito, chagas, malaria, dengue, nematode, "seasonal influenza," "pandemic influenza", pH1N1, "avian influenza," measles, HIV (human immunodeficiency virus), and fluke. Abstracts were reviewed, and relevant articles were reviewed in full. Relevant articles were those in which R 0 for parasites and pathogens was calculated to explicitly estimate its value under field, rather than theoretical, conditions. This meant articles that employed simulation models using field data, fitting of epidemiological data (e.g., ageseroprevalence or age-infection prevalence), or other methods such as estimates from phylogenetic analysis. We did not review and use R 0 ranges obtained in model-based sensitivity analyses, variations in R 0 associated with seasonal variations in mosquito abundance in one location (which may vary from zero to very high values), estimates where control methods effectively eradicated disease resulting in almost infinite values for changes in R 0 , or model-predicted variations across whole potential geographic ranges that range from a theoretical high to zero values (e.g., Estrada-Peña et al. 2013) . We also did not use some very high modeled ranges of R 0 for malaria [e.g., 1-11,000 (Smith et al. 2007 )] when the modeling of empirical age-infection prevalence data produced strongly contrasting single-digit estimates of R 0 (Hagmann et al. 2003; Hay et al. 2005) . The goal of the literature search was to provide an illustration of how important projected changes in R 0 of I. scapularis could be, compared with R 0 of other parasites and pathogens; it was not intended to be an exhaustive catalog ing of all literature in this field. Further, we recognized that R 0 estimates are not precise and vary according to the estimation method used (Heffernan et al. 2005; Li et al. 2011 ).
Using observed (ANUSPLIN) temperature data, R 0 for I. scapularis in the late 1970swhen Lyme disease emerged in the northeastern United States (Wood and Lafferty 2013)-was estimated at approximately 3 and 1.9 in Old Lyme and Fort McCoy, respectively; at between 2 and 3 in Southern Ontario; approximately 1.5 in Huron Ontario and South-Western Quebec, but mostly < 1 in Upper Southern Ontario and the Boreal region ( Figure 1 ). In Old Lyme, R 0 increased almost linearly to approximately 3.5 by 1999 during the first period of expansion of I. scapularis in the northeastern United States. In Fort McCoy, R 0 increased slightly, but this increase was small compared with interannual variations. In Southern Ontario, R 0 increased to 4 by the early 2000s; during which time I. scapularis populations emerged at a number of locations in this region (Point Pelee National Park, Turkey Point, Rondeau Provincial Park; Figure 1A ). In Huron Ontario and South-Western Quebec, R 0 increased from 1.5 to 2.5 by the early 2000s; and subsequent to this (mostly from 2000 onward), I. scapularis populations began to emerge in South-Western Quebec ( Figure 1D ). In Upper Southern Ontario, R 0 increased to > 1 in the late 1990s, but in the Boreal region R 0 remained below unity for the whole 1971-2010 period (Figure 1) .
R 0 values for I. scapularis obtained in model simulations using projected climate data were similar for an ensemble of climate models, and we used bias-corrected output from the regional climate model CRCM4.2.3 as a representative of the ensemble because of its spatial resolution and predictive accuracy. R 0 for I. scapularis in Canada was projected to increase 1. (Table 1) . Increases in R 0 to values > 1 predicted in regions where R 0 was < 1 during the period 1970-2000 would be expected to facilitate range expansion of I. scapularis northward and possibly westward (Figure 2) .
The projected increases in R 0 are equivalent, for the most part, to ranges of values of R 0 estimated for other globally important parasites and pathogens associated with variations in major determinants of their ecology and epidemiology such as geographic location, pathogen genotype, different epidemics, reservoir host or vector density, and control efforts (Table 1 ).
These findings suggest that increasing temperatures in northern North America that support an R 0 for I. scapularis of > 1.5 have been coincident with, or in advance of, but not subsequent to, expanding numbers of locations where I. scapularis populations have become established. In Canada, where we have tracked the spread of I. scapularis, temperature has remained a statistically significant determinant of I. scapularis occurrence in field studies and analyses of surveillance data that accounted for alternative environmental determinants (e.g., host abundance, altitude, rainfall, habitat types, tick immigration rates) ( Leighton et al. 2012; Ogden et al. 2008; . These observations supported a key role for temperature in I. scapularis populations becoming established at the northern edge of the tick's range. Also, I. scapularis population expansion in Canada is occurring despite an overall deforestation (Natural Resources Canada 2013) rather than the reforestation thought to have driven the initial reemergence of Lyme disease in the United States (Barbour and Fish 1993) . Forest fragmentation may enhance Lyme disease risk for a variety of reasons; however, I. scapularis ticks are invading Canada where forest fragmentation occurred over time scales (Elliott 1998 ). Together, these findings suggest that even if recent warming in the region (5-10% increases in DD > 0°C; Figure 1 ) was not associated with global warming, a future warming climate will increase R 0 of I. scapularis in northern North America. Increases in R 0 may drive increased Lyme disease risk where it is already endemic (within limits determined by density-dependent regulation of the tick) and drive range expansion into more northern regions where it is currently absent. Furthermore, they support the hypothesis that climate warming in northeastern North America may have codriven the emergence of Lyme disease risk, alongside other hypothe sized factors such as reforestation and burgeoning deer populations (Wood and Lafferty 2013) , by facilitating the spread of I. scapularis from refuges. Expansion of I. scapularis in the northern United States has then provided the source of ticks to fuel its northward expansion into Canada. The immediate importance of future increased R 0 of I. scapularis in the northeast and upper Midwest of North America is that a) regions currently climatically unsuitable become suitable for I. scapularis establishment (i.e., R 0 changes from < 1 to > 1; Figure 2) ; b) in regions currently suitable for I. scapularis (where R 0 > 1), tick invasion speed will accelerate as the likelihood of stochastic tick population fade-out reduces (May et al. 2001) , and tick-borne pathogen invasion speed increases due to increasing tick abundance (Ogden et al. 2007 ); and c) risk from I. scapularistransmitted pathogens may increase where the tick and pathogen are already established due to increased tick abundance up to a point at which this is limited by density-dependent regulation (Ogden et al. 2007 ). To date, I. scapularis invasion in the northern United States and Canada has been followed by invasion of the agent of Lyme disease, B. burgdorferi sensu stricto (Hamer et al. 2010; Ogden et al. 2013 ), hence we assume northward I. scapularis range expansion is synonymous with expansion in Lyme disease risk.
The magnitude of projected increases in R 0 of I. scapularis in the present study is of importance for the ecology and epidemiology of Massad et al. 2007; Mills et al. 2004; Vynnycky et al. 2007 Vynnycky et al. 1957 Vynnycky et al. -1958 vector-borne diseases in general. This was illustrated by R 0 ranges estimated for other globally important parasites and pathogens associated with variations in known key determinants of their ecology and epidemiology (Table 1) . These ranges were of a similar magnitude to projected increases in R 0 of I. scapularis with climate change. Tick species are likely to respond to the central tendency of increasing temperatures due to a) the long periods of inter-stadial development that take place in the surface layers of the soil where fluctuating air temperature are buffered, b) latency in responses of development rates to temperature changes minimizing effects of very short-term temperature fluctuations (Ogden et al. 2004 ), c) their ability to return to soil-level refugia during extremes of heat, cold, drought, or rainfall while host seeking, d) their associations with woodland habitats within which a microclimate is buffered from extremes of temperature occurring in treeless areas (Lindsay et al. 1999b; Morecroft et al. 1998) , and e) ticks have no nonparasitic immature feeding stages whose survival is susceptible to short-term changes in weather as do dipteran vectors such as mosquitoes. Therefore, the increases in R 0 projected here represent a possible magnitude of increase in mean R 0 values arthropod vectors may experience with climate change. Around this mean, dipteran population R 0 may fluctuate seasonally and annually over a much wider range due to the rapid effects of rainfall and temperature on reproduction and mortality rates. Abundance and geographic distributions of many mosquito-borne diseases are currently driven primarily by control efforts that superimpose on any climate effects. Large increases in vector R 0 may, however, render current vector and vector-borne disease control methods ineffective as vector multiplication outstrips control efforts (Massad, 2008; Reithinger et al. 2003; Smith et al. 2007 ). R 0 increases associated with climate change may be limited in some circumstances. Host population densities and habitat do not seem to be currently limiting on I. scapularis range expansion, but they may be in the future. Mosquitoes and other dipteran vectors can be dispersed by wind (Service 1997) , but ticks need hosts for their dispersal to effect range expansion. I. scapularis are dispersed over long distances by migratory birds, but ticks that are not carried by migratory animals would be expected to have less capacity to invade climatically suitable environments. Ticks of public health importance such as I. ricinus and I. scapularis are mostly host and woodland habitat generalists, which facilitates range changes, whereas the more highly specialized the niche of a species, the less likely it will be to be dispersed and/or capable of becoming established in new locations (Morin and Chuine 2006) .
We estimated the degree to which projected climate change may impact the ecology of arthropod vectors and, by inference, vectorborne diseases. The emergence of Lyme disease in North America may itself have been partly driven by recent climate change. Confidence in our projections is increased by observed changes in temperature and estimated R 0 for the vector associated with the actual emergence of the vector and the vector-borne diseases it transmits. Our findings suggest that effort should be refocused on assessing the health risks due to vector-borne disease, particularly vector-borne zoonoses, associated with our changing climate. 