signature with alternative diagnostic methods 6.1.
Standard laboratory and clinical parameters, some of which are routinely used in clinical practice to aid in the differential diagnosis of an infection source, were evaluated in the entire study cohort (bacterial, viral, non-infectious, n=765). The evaluated parameters included ANC, % neutrophils, % lymphocytes, WBC, and maximal temperature. In accordance with the well-established clinical role of these parameters, we observed a statistically significant difference in their levels between bacterial and viral patients (Fig.  S11) . For example, bacterial patients had increased levels of ANC (t-test P <10 -24 ), and WBC (t-test P <10 -10 ), whereas viral patients had a higher % lymphocytes (t-test P <10 -31 ). The signature was significantly more accurate than any of the individual features (ttest P<10 -18 ) and their combinations (t-test P<10 -15 ), see Fig. 3A ). Figure S11. Box plots of clinical parameters and laboratory measurements in bacterial, viral, and non-infectious patients (as indicated) in the entire study cohort (bacterial, viral, non-infectious; n=765). Red line and circle correspond to group median and average respectively. T-test p-values between bacterial and viral groups and between infectious (bacterial and viral) vs non-infectious (including healthy subjects) are depicted.
The signature outperformed all clinical parameters and the 600 proteins that were evaluated during the screening phase (see Fig. 3 ). The following section further compares the signature to selected proteins that are routinely used in the clinical setting or that have an immunological role.
One of the most widely used and useful protein biomarkers for differentiating sepsis from other non-infectious causes of SIRS in critically ill patients is procalcitonin (PCT) [1] .
Whether PCT can be used to distinguish between local bacterial and viral infections is less clear. To test this, we measured PCT concentrations in 101 randomly selected patients from the study cohort (n Bacterial =51, n Viral =50) and 76 randomly selected patients from the Unanimous sub-cohort (n Bacterial =39, n Viral =37) and compared the diagnostic accuracy based on PCT levels to that of the signature. PCT accuracy was calculated using the standard cutoffs routinely applied in the clinical setting (0.1 ng/mL, 0.25 ng/mL, 0.5 ng/mL, and 1 ng/mL [2] [3] [4] [5] [6] . Maximal PCT sensitivity of 69% was attained at a cutoff of 0.1mg/mL and resulted in a specificity of 62% (for the Unanimous sub-cohort [bacterial, viral] ). For the same cohort, the signature showed significantly higher sensitivity of 94% (P < 0.001) and specificity of 93% (P < 0.001) (Fig. S12A) . A comparison using the patients from the entire study cohort (bacterial, viral) showed similar results (Fig. S12B) .
Overall, despite its high diagnostic and prognostic value for sepsis detection in critically ill patients, our results indicate that PCT is less accurate in distinguishing between patients with local infections (bacterial vs viral). Figure S12 . Comparison of the performance of the signature and PCT using different cutoffs. A. Performance measured in 76 patients from the Unanimous sub-cohort (bacterial, viral); B. Performance measured in 101 patients from the entire study cohort (bacterial, viral). Error bars represent 95% CI. Signature sensitivity and specificity were calculated after filtering out 14% of the patients with a marginal immune response.
Another protein biomarker used in the clinical setting is the C-reactive protein (CRP), an acute phase response protein that is up-regulated in infections and other inflammatory conditions [1] . We compared the performance of CRP to that of the signature using the 
entire study cohort (bacterial, viral) and Unanimous sub-cohort (bacterial, viral). CRP accuracy was determined using several standard cutoffs applied in the clinical setting [7] [8] [9] . Maximal CRP sensitivity of 92% was attained at 20 mg/mL cutoff resulting in a specificity of 60% (for the Unanimous sub-cohort [bacterial, viral]) (Fig. S13A) . The signature had a similar sensitivity (94%) and a significantly higher specificity (93%, P <10 -9 ) in the same cohort. Similar results were observed using the entire study cohort (bacterial, viral) (Fig. S13B) . Overall, the signature has a similar sensitivity to CRP with a 20 mg/L cutoff but a considerably higher specificity for distinguishing bacterial from viral patients. Next, we examined the differential response of protein biomarkers with a wellestablished role in the host response to infections (Table S10 and Fig. S14 ). Each biomarker was tested on at least 43 patients (about half bacterial and half viral), and if it showed promising results, it was further tested on additional patients (up to 150). 
No. of patients CD11a
CD11a is expressed by all leukocytes as part of the integrin lymphocyte function-associated antigen-1 (LFA-1). LFA-1 plays a central role in leukocyte intercellular adhesion through interactions with its ligands, ICAMs 1-3 (intercellular adhesion molecules 1 through 3). CD11a also functions in lymphocyte co-stimulatory signaling. 
IL-1a IL-1a is a member of the IL-1 cytokine family. IL-1a is a pleiotropic cytokine involved in various immune responses, inflammatory processes, and hematopoiesis. IL-1a is produced by monocytes and macrophages as a proprotein, which is proteolytically processed and released in response to cell injury, thereby inducing apoptosis. TNF-α TNF-α is a cytokine secreted mainly by macrophages. TNF-α can induce cell death of certain tumor cell lines. It is a potent pyrogen causing fever directly or by stimulation of IL-1 secretion.
TNF-β TNF-β is a potent mediator of inflammatory and immune responses. It is produced by activated T and B lymphocytes and is involved in the regulation of various biological processes including cell proliferation, differentiation, apoptosis, lipid metabolism, coagulation, and neurotransmission.
TREM TREM is a pro-inflammatory amplifier present on neutrophils and monocytes. 150 Since these biomarkers do not have a well-established cutoff in the clinical setting, we used their AUCs as a basis for comparison (Fig. 3B) . The most informative biomarker was TREM (AUC of 0.68 ± 0.09). The accuracy of TREM was significantly lower than that of the signature (P <10 -9 when comparing the two AUCs; Fig. 3B ). These results demonstrate that mere participation of a protein in the host response to an infection does not necessarily imply diagnostic utility. For example, although IFN-γ has a wellestablished role in the immune response to viruses and intra-cellular bacteria, its short half-life (<20 h) [10] limits its diagnostic utility (as its concentration in the blood is highly dependent on the time from infection onset).