events such as "become infectious" and "become symptomatic", as per the waiting time distributions defined in Figure 1 and Table 1 . New infection events were generated by evaluating the instantaneous force of infection for each individual, Intervention events were determined by the algorithm defined in the Methods section of the main text (or defined below when testing was in effect). If a disease progression event or an intervention event occurred before the next infection, these events took precedence and the next infection event was recalculated starting from that point in time. Otherwise, time was updated to the next infection event, the identified individual was infected and the process of generating the next event was started again.
Key simulation results were confirmed using independent source code and the dynamics of the mass-action sub-model were verified using a deterministic differential equation model. A further modifier ε was defined to be the probability that people stayed away from work or school and do not mix with their peer-groups when symptomatic. Note that they did mix with the community as a whole when symptomatic. This tendency to stay at home was considered to be part of the natural behavioral response to influenza infection and not motivated by any particular public health directive. The instantaneous force of infection experienced by the th individual if they were not in isolation was
if was asymptomatic, 0 otherwise,
and 0 with probability if was an adult and was symptomatic 0 with probability if was a child and was symptomatic 1 otherwise.
When individuals left the home to enter isolation they no longer contributed to infection in the home, the peer-group or in the community. As a neutral assumption, transmission did still occur between those in isolation, but it was sufficiently well controlled so as not to be a significant factor for the whole population. The 
Although hazards can be useful in some contexts for describing the natural history of infectious disease, we choose to present transmission scenarios in terms of the transmissibility. For example, we use θ , the proportion of transmission which is either presymptomatic or asymptomatic [1] , rather than the relative hazards and PS h AS h . In this section, we define these parameters in terms of the average number of secondary cases (see Supporting Figure S3 ). 
The statistics introduced in Table 1 