We extracted mammal-pathogen interactions from the Enhanced Infectious Diseases Database (EID2) (1) . EID2 contains 4,799 species of mammals and 70,614 species in the taxa comprising most mammalian pathogens (bacteria= 18,249, fungi= 32,687, helminth= 6,305, protozoa= 3,768, viruses= 9,605).
EID2 utilises automated text and data-mining procedures to extract information on pathogens, their hosts and locations from two sources: 1) meta-data accompanying nucleotide sequences (hereafter sequences) published in GenBank (2, 3) and 2) titles and abstracts of publications indexed in the PubMed database (4) . To date, EID2 has extracted information from 71,076,379 sequences (and processed 100M+ sequences), and 8,643,203 PubMed titles and abstracts (TIABs).
For the purposes of this study we considered a mammal species to be host to a pathogen if at least four independent TIABs or one sequence reported an association between the host (and any of its subspecies) and the pathogen species (or any of its subspecies or strains).
We classified our mammalian hosts into three groups: wild mammals (N=1430), semi-domesticated mammals (N=102), and domesticated mammals (N=27).
We included the following mammals in our domesticated group: 13 ruminants ( We removed three domesticated rodent species from this study: Mus musculus, Rattus norvegicus and Rattus rattus. These species are often associated with lab research in human (and other species) diseases, comprising approximately 95% of animal species used in research (5, 6) . Whilst EID2 has the capability of detecting and isolating laboratory generated host-pathogen associations (e.g. cell-lines, laboratory study publications); it cannot discriminate unlabelled associations (particularly in the genetic sequences meta-data). Therefore, we chose to remove these three species to avoid any contamination of our zoonoses definition.
Our semi-domesticated group included 35 ruminants, 31 carnivores, 22 rodents, 3 Diprotodontia, 3 Perissodactyla, 2 Tylopoda, 2 Proboscidea, and 1 of each: Dasyuromorphia, Pilosa, Sirenia and Suina.
To calculate the p-values for the network statistics listed in Table 1 (manuscript), we performed 1000 permutation on each of networks, whereby we shuffled the non-human mammalian species-level hostpathogen interactions extracted from EID2, and then re-generated the networks from the shuffled list and re-computed all statistics. The p-value listed in Table 1 (manuscript) is the number of times the statistics calculated for the permuted networks were at least as extreme as the ones observed in the original networks, divided by the number of permutations.
Given a categorical node attribute describing mutually exclusive groups, the E-I index represents a ratio of external to internal edges. We chose order as our categorical attribute and calculated E-I index at both group level (i.e. order), and global level (i.e. whole network). A positive group level E-I index indicates a tendency of the species in the order to share pathogens with species outside their order (i.e. extrovert). A negative EI index indicates a tendency to share pathogens within the group's order (i.e. introvert). Global level E-I index characterises the whole network in terms of bounded-ness and closure of its sub-groups (in terms of order). Order-level p-values was calculated from the 1000 permutations listed above, as the number of times the order-level E-I index in the shuffled networks was at least as extreme as the ones observed in the original networks, divided by the number of permutations. 
Degree & Eigenvalue based centrality measures: In general, degree centralities assess the importance of a node based on its reachability within a network. These measures provide a description of network connectivity based on the individual components.
Assumption/interpretation Degree centrality (DC) (1)
Degree quantifies immediate risk of host species spreading or receiving pathogens. Host species with high degree may either: 1) pose high risk of pathogen transmission to many other host species, or 2) be at high risk of contracting pathogens from many other host species. Strength centrality (SC) (2) ( ) = ( ) = ∑ Host species with high strength centrality values either: 1) share many pathogens with few hosts, or 2) share fewer pathogens with many hosts.
Opsahl degree centrality (ODC) (3)
Incorporates both the overall weights of the edges and the number of links to neighbouring nodes. Katz centrality (KC) (4,5) / Weighted Katz centrality (WKC)
Where A is the adjacency /weighted adjacency matrix of the network with eigenvalues λ. The parameter β controls the initial centrality and α < 1/λmax. Katz centrality quantified the importance of a host within a network by measuring the number of immediate neighbours the host has, and also all other species reachable through these immediate neighbours. Connections made with distant neighbours are, however, penalized by an attenuation factor . In this study we computed as the reciprocal of the first two eigenvalues (5) . Page rank centrality (PRC) (6) / Weighted Page rank centrality (WPRC)
Where ∈ [1,0] is a damping factor, C(i) = number of edges from node i, and = number of nodes pointing towards i.
PageRank is an adjustment of Katz centrality by which the more links a node attracts, the more important it is perceived. Distance based measures: Betweenness and Closeness define the flow pathways, which have been shown to be important in spreading pathogens across species (7, 8) . Nodes with high values of these metrics may act as bridges, connecting one part of a network to another that would otherwise be sparsely or not connected at all, favouring the spreading of disease agents across the entire network (3, 9) . Closeness is the inverse sum of shortest distances to all other host species from a focal host. Weighted variation of closeness, by which edges encompassing larger number of pathogens are considered shorter than those containing fewer pathogens.
(3)
Extends the shortest path algorithm by taking into consideration the number of intermediary hosts. ODC considers both the number of intermediary hosts (nodes) and the edges' weights (number of pathogens).
(1)
= the number of shortest paths between nodes j and k.
( )= the number of shortest paths that pass through node i out of .
Betweenness centrality quantifies the number of times a host species acts as a bridge along the shortest path between two other hosts. It thus describes the importance of that node as an intermediary between different parts of the network. Hosts with betweenness > 0 act as bridges, connecting one part of a network to another that would otherwise be sparsely connected or not connected at all. Weighted Betweenness Centrality (WBC) (11)
Weighted variation of betweenness. The more pathogens are shared between two nodes, the stronger of the flow between them.
Betweenness
 Extends betweenness by combining both the number of intermediary hosts (nodes) and the edges' weights (number of pathogens). 
We performed a Principle Component Analysis (PCA) on the full array of centrality measures, across the nine networks included in the study, to identify which measures contained the most relevant information and can effectively identify the most influential host species in each network. As illustrated in figure SN-1, the profile of the distance to the centre of the plot is different for each type of pathogen. Table SN2 -3 shows the mean contribution of each centrality measure to the first five principle components of PCA analyses performed on each network. From this table it is evident that ODC has contributed the most to the first principle component, whereas OBC had the most contribution to the second principle component of our analyses. Figure SN2 -2 show the clustering of our selected measures across the networks. The analysis was performed using the R package FactoMineR (12).
Additionally we performed correlation analyses on centrality measure in our networks. 
We developed a series of ensembles to investigate whether centrality in networks of shared-pathogens between mammalian hosts can be explained by these hosts' traits, phylogeny and relation to their neighbours in networks. We choose six learners to form the base models of our ensembles (Table SN3-1) . We used R packages Caret (1,2) and caretEnsemble (3) to tune and train all our base models. We provided search grids for each bae learners to minimise Root Mean Square Error (RMSE) of the base learners and the ensembles based on 10-fold cross validation (100 repeats). Table SN3 -2 lists mathematical frameworks of the metrics used to measure the performance of our models.
We utilised a greedy approach to construct our ensembles using the caretEnsemble (3) package. Each ensemble computed a weighted average of the predictions of its best-performing constituent learners. The performance of a learner is measured against a metric chosen at the training stage, and the weights are optimised using greedy algorithm to maximise or minimise our chosen metrics. Our ensembles to explain centrality were optimised to reduce RMSE. The greedy algorithm makes greedy choices at each step to ensure that the objective metric is optimised (minimising RMSE). The greedy algorithm has only one shot to compute the optimal solution (i.e., it never goes back and reverses any decision). The exact weights chosen varied with each fold of each training dataset. This dynamic nature allows the greedy ensemble to be tuned to perform well for each problem. is the true (observed) value for instance of the input data. ̂ is the predicted value.
is total number of observations (data points). is the number of predictors in model.
Coefficient of determination. R 2 provides a "goodness of fit" measure for the predictions to the observations. Values of R 2 ranges from 0 (no fit) to 1 (perfect fit).
Adjusted R 2 modifies R 2 for the number of predictors in the model. The adjusted R 2 increases only if the new term improves the model more than would be expected by chance. It decreases when a predictor improves the model by less than expected by chance. Values of adjusted R 2 ranges from 0 (no fit) to 1 (perfect fit).
Root Mean Square Error (RMSE) is the standard deviation of the residuals (prediction errors).
Mean Absolute Error (MAE), describes the typical magnitude of the residuals.
Using similar methodology to the one listed above. We developed two ensemble pipelines to answer two questions: 1) which mammals are more likely to harbour zoonotic pathogens? And 2) can the number of zoonoses be explained by centrality and/or host traits? Our ensembles comprised the same set of learners listed in table SN3-1.
Our ensembles to answer the first question (a classification problem) were optimised to maximise the Area under the ROC curve (AUC); and their constituent models were also trained to maximise their AUCs. We additionally computed a comprehensive set of metrics of these ensembles and their component models (table SN3-3) using 10-fold cross validation (100 repeats).
Our ensembles to answer the second question were constructed, tuned and assessed similarity to the ones discussed in the previous section.
Sensitivity is the percentage of actual 1's that were correctly predicted. It indicates the percentage of 1s that was covered by the model.
Specificity is the percentage of 0s that were correctly Table SN4 -3 -Performance metrics of our ensemble models to explain Indirect Influence in networks of shared pathogens between non-human mammals. Values in brackets indicate 95% confidence intervals of the metric. These intervals were obtained from the 100 runs (per pathogen taxa) of 10 fold cross validation performed.
Relative influence (variable importance) of predictors was calculated for each of the six base models and then averaged with weights (=contribution of models to the greedy ensemble) to produce final contribution. The predictors are coloured by their category.
Relative influence (variable importance) of predictors was calculated for each of the six base models and then averaged with weights (=contribution of models to the greedy ensemble) to produce final contribution. The predictors are coloured by their category.
Relative influence (variable importance) of predictors was calculated for each of the six base models and then averaged with weights (=contribution of models to the greedy ensemble) to produce final contribution. The predictors are coloured by their category. Relative influence (variable importance) of predictors was calculated for each of the six base models and then averaged with weights (=contribution of models to the greedy ensemble) to produce final contribution. Predictors are coloured by their category.
Figure SN5-4 -The relative influence of host order predictors included in our ensemble models to predict sharing of pathogens between mammals and humans. Relative influence (variable importance) of predictors was calculated for each of the six base models and then averaged with weights (=contribution of models to the greedy ensemble) to produce final contribution. Predictors are coloured by their category.