Good morning/afternoon/evening ! With the spread of H5N1, potential next pandemic will be a terrible threat to human beings. It is necessary for us to develop feasible and effective pandemic preparedness and response strategy. The resident traveling survey is implemented by Chinese Center for Disease Control and Prevention. The purpose of the survey is to learn about the residents' traveling habits through collecting individual traveling data (including the distance from home to work/school and other traveling within past 7 days) to provide scientific evidence for establishing pandemic modeling and developing the strategy of pandemic influenza preparedness and response in China.
We mainly collect the information about your everyday traveling such as going to work or school and other traveling within past 7 days. Simple demographic data such as gender and age will also be collected. There are not any sensitive or private questions in the questionnaire, so you will not feel any discomforts. Meanwhile we will not begin the face to face survey until obtain oral informed consent from you. We promise that all the information you provide will be kept secret strictly. You will be voluntary for the survey. If you are not willing to take part in our survey, it would not bring any bad impact for you. It will take you less than 10 minutes to finish the survey, we feel sorry for bothering you. If you have any question, please consult our investigators, we will try our best to explain for you.
If you consent to participate, let's begin the survey. Please answer all the questions truthfully. We really appreciate you for your kindly help. 2. Fill the ID No. of the interviewees who has journeys caused by non-work/non-school in the last 7 days. and the sequence should be consistent with section one.
3. If the destinations are more than one place, please fill all the destinations in the blank.
If the destinations are more than one place, please fill all the GPS distance in the blank.
. For national travel, if the journey includes flows between rural area and urban area, please mark "√" in the blank. For international travel, if the destination is HK SAR, please fill①in "HK&Macao " column, if the destination is Macao, please fill②in "HK&Macao " column, if the destinations include other countries besides or except HK&Macao, please fill the actual address in Other column.(Other: all other countries except HK SAR and mainland China).
6. ①Business ②Tour ③Visit relatives and friends ④Other (If choose ④, write down travel reason directly in the blank).
Don't need to fill.
Good morning/afternoon/evening ! With the spread of H5N1, potential next pandemic will be a terrible threat to human beings. It is necessary for us to develop feasible and effective pandemic preparedness and response strategy. The resident traveling survey is implemented by Chinese Center for Disease Control and Prevention. The purpose of the survey is to learn about the residents' traveling habits through collecting individual traveling data (including the distance from home to work/school and other traveling within past 7 days) to provide scientific evidence for establishing pandemic modeling and developing the strategy of pandemic influenza preparedness and response in China.
We mainly collect the information about your everyday traveling such as going to work or school and other traveling within past 7 days. Simple demographic data such as gender and age will also be collected. There are not any sensitive or private questions in the questionnaire, so you will not feel any discomforts. Meanwhile we will not begin the face to face survey until obtain oral informed consent from you. We promise that all the information you provide will be kept secret strictly. You will be voluntary for the survey. If you are not willing to take part in our survey, it would not bring any bad impact for you. It will take you less than 10 minutes to finish the survey, we feel sorry for bothering you. If you have any question, please consult our investigators, we will try our best to explain for you. 