All procedures were reviewed and approved by the University of Rochester Research Subjects Review Board and the Rochester General Hospital Clinical Investigation Committee, and approved by the NIAID Division of Microbiology and Infectious Disease. Healthy, full term newborns (≥37 weeks gestation) were recruited into this study during their birth hospitalization from two hospitals in Rochester, NY as part of a larger study of respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) infection severity of the Respiratory Pathogen Research Center at the University of Rochester.
Enrollment occurred during the late summer and fall of 2012-2013 and 2013-2014. At one month of age subjects were seen by the study team, and three nasal samples (a nasal swab, a nasal wash and a nasal brushing specimen) were obtained if they were well and free of respiratory symptoms. If a subject was ill at one month of age the visit was postponed for approximately two weeks until the infant was again asymptomatic. The procedure of collecting nasal epithelial cell for transcriptomic analysis was modified previous published method 1 . Prior to brushing, the nasal cavity was washed with sterile non-bacteriostatic saline to remove any mucus, debris or intra-airway inflammatory cells, as previously described 2 . Immediately following, a nasal brush sample was obtained from the same nares using a sterile Copan flocked swab (FLOQSwabs, product #518C, Copan Diagnostics, Murrieta CA) that was inserted completely into the anterior nares and rotated with an up and down circular motion for approximately 3-5 seconds to recover cells from the inferior turbinate. The swab was immediately placed in RNA stabilizer (RNAprotect, Qiagen, Germantown, MD) and stored at 4°C. All subjects tolerated the procedures without difficulty. A second nasal swab was also collected from the contralateral nostril without washing for microbiomics analysis.
1. Place a dry cloth towel on the infant's chest under the chin.
2. Pour 4-5 ml of sterile phosphate buffered saline into a sterile cup and aspirate the saline into a sterile rubber irrigation bulb. 3 . With the infant's head at a greater than 45 degree upward angle, the bulb is placed into the nostril until it occludes the nostril. 4 . Quickly compress and decompress the bulb to force the fluid into and back out of the nostril rapidly.
5. Observe the infant for several minutes to assess for difficulty breathing.
6. Place a flocked swab (FLOQSwabs, Copan Diagnostics, Murrieta CA) gently into the nares that was just washed and rotate to cover all surfaces. Move the flocked swab up and down slightly while brushing the mucosa for 5 seconds.
7. Remove the swab and place it into RNAprotect solution (2 ml). 8 . Cap tube and vortex vigorously for 10 sec, to ensure that all cells come into contact with RNAprotect solution.
9. Observe the subject for 5 minutes to assure there is no bleeding.
10. Samples should be processed into lysis buffer immediately (same day), but can be stored at 4 degrees C at this point for up to 1 week. Before processing, vortex vigorously for 10-20 seconds and remove swabs from tube, taking care to retain as much RNAprotect solution as possible.
11. Place 600 ul of RNAprotect solution over a .45 um filter cup and spin at 14000 rpm for 60 seconds. Pour off filtered RNAprotect solution and repeat this process until all RNAprotect has been filtered. If the filter clogs, transfer any solution left on top of the filter to a new filter cup and continue.
12. Add 250 ul RNA lysis buffer containing BME directly to the filter and lyse by passing solution repeatedly (X10-12) through new unused insulin needle (0.5cc, 28g) with syringe.
Leave the lysed solution on the filter and spin at 14000 rpm for 60 seconds. If more than one filter was used, transfer the lysed solution to the next filter and repeat. If necessary, lysed and homogenized cells can be stored at -20C or below. If using frozen lysates, thaw for 20 minutes on ice and proceed with step 9.
13. Add 250 μl of 70% ethanol to the tube with the lysate and vortex the tube for 5 seconds or until mixed thoroughly.
14. Transfer the ~500 μl of this mixture to an RNA Binding Spin Cup that is seated in a 2-ml receptacle tube and cap the spin cup. Vigorously flex the hinge of the spin cup, prior to closing it, so that it becomes flexible and the cap can be firmly seated in the tube, to reduce the chance of leakage during vortexing. 15 . Spin in a microcentrifuge at 14000 rpm for 60 seconds. 16 . Remove and retain the spin cup and transfer the filtrate to another tube and store it at -20°C or below. Replace the spin cup in the receptacle tube. 30. Repeat the elution step by pipetting the elution buffer from the collection tube back onto the matrix (using the same buffer from step 64). Incubate for 5 minutes at room temperature.
Spin in a microcentrifuge at 14000 rpm for 60 seconds.
Nasal epithelia cells were recovered from stabilizer solution following vigorous vortexing by filtering through a 0.45 uM membrane filter. Cells were lysed immediately following filtration by the addition of RNA lysis buffer (AbsolutelyRNA Miniprep kit, Agilent, Santa Clara, CA) to the filter membrane. The lysates were homogenized by passing through a 28g needle and total RNA was recovered from lysates using solid-phase affinity, according to manufacturer's instructions.
Approximately 1ng of total RNA was amplified using the SMARter Ultra Low amplification kit (Clontech, Mountain View, CA) with PCR amplification to generate enough yield for library construction. Amplified cDNA quantification was determined with the Qubit Flourometer (Life Technologies, Grand Island, NY) and quality was assessed using the Agilent Bioanalyzer 2100 (Santa Clara, CA). Libraries were constructed using the NexteraXT library kit (Illumina, San Diego, CA) per manufacturer's recommendations. Nextera libraries were quantified with the Qubit Flourometer (Life Technologies) and quality was assessed using the Agilent Tape Station.
Libraries were sequenced on the Illumina HiSeq2500 to generate ~20 million 1x100-bp single end reads per sample.
Sequences were aligned against human genome version of hg19 using TopHat 3 . Raw counts were generated with HTSeq 4 and normalized for total counts by dividing the raw count for each individual gene in a particular sample by the sum total of counts for all the genes in that sample (reads per million, RPM). We used a non-specific filtering strategy to remove genes with low expression values indistinguishable from background signal. We first computed i M , the 95% quantile for the ith gene expression among all subjects, for all genes. Next, we defined trimmed maximum log-expressions as 2 log ( 1) ii LM  and pooled all i L s to form a density plot (Supplemental Figure 1 ). Two clusters of gene expression were identified; those with low expression (L i < 3.0 or M i <7.0) and those with higher expression (L i ≥ 3.0 or M i ≥7.0). Genes with low expression were removed, resulting in an analytical data set containing 13,978 genes.
We measured the variation of each gene by IQR Med
where IQR i is the inter-quartile range of this gene and Med i is the sample median. r i can be considered as the robust coefficient of variation of the ith gene. Genes with the highest and lowest variation ranked by r i were identified. For categorical variables such as gender and delivery method, we used SAMseq 5 to identify significant genes, with false discovery rate (FDR) controlled at the 0.05 level (q-value<0.05). For continuous variables such as gestational age and microbiome derived variables, we used both Pearson and Spearman correlation tests, with the Benjamini-Hochberg correction 6 , to select significant genes (adjusted p-value<0.05). To better understand the association between gene expression and clinical/demographic variables, we also used Levene's test for equal variance 7 , with the Benjamini-Hochberg correction, to select genes that have significantly different variances between groups (adjusted p-value<0.05). We performed canonical pathway analyses using Ingenuity Pathway Analysis software (Qiagen). Each identifier was mapped to its corresponding object in Ingenuity's Knowledge Base. A pathway with a p-value<0.05 was classified significant.
We conducted a multivariate regression analysis between gene expression and the following variables: sex, race (with three separate binary variables, Caucasian, African, and Asian), environmental smoke exposure, birth delivery method, breast feeding, and asymptomatic presence of pathogen (technical details can be found in the next section). Gestational age and birth weight were also included to control for their possible confounding effects. Multiple linear regression, based on least square fitting criteria, was used to analyze the linear association between clinical/demographic factors (covariates) and gene expression levels (response variable).
Goodness-of-fit F-test was applied to test the significance of overall linear association, with FDR controlled at 0.05 level by the Benjamini-Hochberg procedure. If a gene was selected as significant, we performed regression t-test to identify significant covariates (p-value <0.05) for this gene. Technologies) . The reaction included one cycle at 45°C for 10 minutes, followed by one cycle at 95°C for 10 minutes, and 45 cycles of 95°C for 15 seconds and 60°C for 1 minute.
Matched nasal specimens for microbiome analysis were collected from the anterior nares of the opposing nasal cavity. After collection, the flocked swab was placed into sterile UVtreated PBS, immediately placed on ice and stored at 4 o C prior to processing and storing at -80 o C. Total genomic DNA was extracted from brushings of contralateral nares used for RNA collection as previously described [11] [12] [13] . V3-V4 16S rRNA was amplified with Phusion High- (2) negative controls consisting of sterile saline.
The 16S rRNA bacterial sequence reads were assessed for quality and analyzed using phylogenetic and Operational Taxonomic Unit (OTU) methods in the Quantitative Insights into Microbial Ecology (QIIME) software, version 1.9 15 . Read pairs were assembled using fastq-join from the ea-utils package 16 , requiring at least 40 bases of overlap and allowing a maximum of 10% mismatched bases. Operational taxonomic units (OTU) were picked using the reference-based USEARCH (version 5.2) 17 pipeline in QIIME, using the May 2013 release of the GreenGenes 99% OTU database 18 . Chimera detection and removal was performed de novo using UCHIME 19 . OTU clusters with less than four sequences were removed, and representative sequences used to make taxonomic assignments for each cluster were selected on the basis of abundance. The RDP Naïve Bayesian Classifier was used for taxonomic classification with the GreenGenes reference database, using a minimum confidence threshold of .85 and otherwise default parameters 20 .
For the purposes of α-diversity calculations, twenty iterations of rarefaction at an even depth of 3,900 reads per sample were performed. The mean α-diversity over all rarefactions was computed for each sample using QIIME's PD Whole Tree metric, the Chao 1 index 21 , and the raw count of OTUs observed. For the purposes of OTU relative abundance analysis, the raw OTU table was normalized using the cumulative sum stabilization method from the metagenomicSeq R package 22 . The normalized table was filtered to contain only taxa phylogenetically proximate to three known potential pathogens of interest. These were OTUs corresponding to: the species Haemophilus influenzae, Moraxella catarrhalis, and Streptococcus pneumonia, where available; all individual genera contained within the same three families as these species; and the three families themselves.
Quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction (qPCR) was performed using aliquots of RNA samples obtained for sequencing. cDNA was generated from approximately 250 ng RNA 