The human interferon (IFN)-induced MxA protein is a key antiviral host restriction factor exhibiting broad antiviral activity against many RNA viruses, including highly pathogenic avian influenza A viruses (IAV) of the H5N1 and H7N7 subtype. To date the mechanism for how MxA exerts its antiviral activity is unclear, however, additional cellular factors are believed to be essential for this activity. To identify MxA cofactors we performed a genome-wide siRNA-based screen in human airway epithelial cells (A549) constitutively expressing MxA using an H5N1 reporter virus. These data were complemented with a proteomic screen to identify MxA-interacting proteins. The combined data identified SMARCA2, the ATPase subunit of the BAF chromatin remodeling complex, as a crucial factor required for the antiviral activity of MxA against IAV. Intriguingly, our data demonstrate that although SMARCA2 is essential for expression of some IFN-stimulated genes (ISGs), and the establishment of an antiviral state, it is not required for expression of MxA, suggesting an indirect effect on MxA activity. Transcriptome analysis of SMARCA2-depleted A549-MxA cells identified a small set of SMARCA2-regulated factors required for activity of MxA, in particular IFITM2 and IGFBP3. These findings reveal that several virus-inducible factors work in concert to enable MxA restriction of IAV. NP) has been made and imported into the nucleus, the viral polymerase switches to synthesis of complementary RNA which is encapsidated into complementary RNPs (cRNPs) during this process. These cRNPs in turn serve as intermediates for synthesis of new vRNPs which are finally exported from the nucleus to be packaged into new viral particles at the plasma membrane 4 .
Influenza A viruses (IAV) are severe human pathogens all originating from their avian reservoir. Human-adapted IAV are the cause of annual epidemics but rarely also cause pandemics with millions of people succumbing to infection 1 . The recent emergence of "bird flu" viruses of the H5N1 and H7N9 subtype, with fatality rates among humans ranging up to ~50%, raises concern that these avian viruses might acquire the ability to transmit from human-to-human and initiate the next pandemic [1] [2] [3] .
Influenza A viruses have a segmented RNA genome of negative polarity with each genomic segment organized as a viral ribonucleoprotein (vRNP) consisting of the viral RNA, the three polymerase subunits, PB2, PB1 and PA, and the viral nucleoprotein (NP) which is required for encapsidation of the viral RNA 4 . Following virus entry, the viral NP mediates rapid nuclear translocation of vRNPs, a property enabling IAV to evade cytosolic pattern recognition receptors and granting access to the nuclear splicing machinery required for the expression of certain viral genes 4, 5 . Initially, the IAV polymerase synthesizes mRNA transcripts which are translated into viral proteins at cytosolic ribosomes. Once a sufficient amount of newly synthesized viral protein (in particular PB2, PB1, PA and
Identification of host cell factors required for the antiviral activity of MxA. To identify factors required for the antiviral activity of MxA, we developed a genome-wide siRNA screening assay on a well-established A549 human lung epithelial cell line stably over-expressing human MxA (A549-MxA) 16 . To easily monitor virus replication a reporter virus was generated based on the highly MxA-sensitive influenza A/ Vietnam/1203/2004 (H5N1) virus 17 by incorporating a Renilla (RL) luciferase reporter construct into the NS segment (H5N1-RL) as previously described by Reuther and colleagues (Supplementary Figure S1a) 23 . Furthermore, to allow utilization of this highly pathogenic avian influenza (HPAI) virus under biosafety level 2 (BSL-2) conditions several positively charged amino acids were removed from the hemagglutinin (HA) cleavage site to render it monobasic, and thus classifying the virus as a low pathogenic avian virus (Supplementary Figure S1b) 24, 25 . In the presence of MxA, virus replication is inhibited resulting in low levels of RL activity, but upon transfection of an siRNA targeting MxA (silencing the MxA-encoding gene MX1), virus replication is restored and an increase in RL activity is observed (Supplementary Figure S2a) . The goal of the siRNA screen was to identify siRNAs that restore virus replication in the presence of MxA, so siMX1 served as the positive control and a non-targeting (NT) siRNA as the negative control. The assay was miniaturized to 384-well format and the quality was assessed by measuring the strictly standardized mean difference (SSMD) 26 , which accounts for the assay window and variability. The SSMD was calculated as 9.4, confirming a high quality assay suitable for high-throughput screening (Supplementary Figure S2a ).
An arrayed genome-wide siRNA library of siRNA pools (4 siRNAs per gene) targeting a total of 18119 human genes was transfected into A549-MxA cells in triplicate. 72 hours post transfection cells were infected with the H5N1-RL reporter virus at a multiplicity of infection (MOI) of 8, and 24 h later luciferase activity was determined utilizing Renilla-Glo (Promega) substrate (Fig. 1a) . The SSMD was used to validate the quality of each plate (SSMD > 3) 26 and hits were selected based on an average Z-score >2 across triplicates (Supplementary Figure S2b,c) . This resulted in the identification of 276 primary hits (Supplementary Table S1 off-target effects those hits were further validated in a secondary siRNA screen by individually transfecting the 4 siRNAs from each pool (Supplementary Figure S2b) . The SSMD was used to validate each plate and the results were analyzed using Redundant siRNA Activity (RSA) statistical analysis 27 which assigns a p-value to each gene based on the effect of its four siRNAs. Hits were selected based on a p-value < 0.05. Using these methods, we identified 41 genes, including the MxA-encoding gene MX1, whose knockdown led to a significant (p-value < 0.05) increase in virus growth in A549-MxA cells (Supplementary Table S2 ). Identification of host cell factors physically associated with MxA. In parallel with the RNAi-mediated approach of identifying host factors required for MxA activity we employed a second strategy aimed at identifying host cell factors that interact with MxA. Experimental conditions were largely maintained to allow a combined bioinformatic analysis of siRNA screening and proteomic screening data at a later step. The antiviral activity of Mx proteins is not affected by the addition of amino-terminal tags 28, 29 . Therefore A549 cells expressing amino-terminally streptavidin-tagged MxA (Strep-MxA) under control of a doxycycline-inducible promoter were generated alongside control cells expressing Strep-GFP. Strep-MxA and Strep-GFP were induced with doxycycline for 24 hours and the cells were then either infected with H5N1-RL or mock infected in triplicate. 24 hours post infection, cells were lysed and the Strep-tagged proteins precipitated by affinity purification with Strep-Tactin sepharose beads. Precipitated proteins were digested and identified by mass (Fig. 1b, Supplementary  Figure S3 ). Mass spectrometry files were searched using MAXQuant and statistical analysis performed using MSStats 30, 31 . None of the factors were virus-encoded. 15 host cell factors qualified as high-confidence hits based on enrichment with the MxA bait vs. the GFP bait during H5N1-RL infection (Log2FC > 2; p-value < 0.05 under statistical conditions to minimize false negatives or Log2FC > 2; p-value < 0.1 under statistical conditions to minimize false positives) (Supplementary Table S3 ).
Bioinformatic analysis of the combined RNAi and proteomic datasets. In the genomic and proteomic screens, we identified 41 and 15 host cell factors, respectively. Although comparison of the resulting hits shows no direct overlap, using Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (IPA ® , Qiagen) we were able to identify a network of 13 host cell factors (Supplementary Table S4 ), including MxA, that are significantly enriched amongst the dataset when analyzed for representation in canonical pathways, upstream regulators and protein-protein interaction networks (p-value < 0.05, Fig. 1c ,d, Supplementary Figure S4a ). Within this network of 13 factors, 7 (including MxA) were identified in the siRNA screen and 6 in the proteomic screen. To validate the requirement of these 13 factors for MxA antiviral activity, we transfected A549-MxA cells with siRNAs targeting the respective gene (4 siRNAs per gene). Following infection with H5N1-RL, luciferase activity was measured to assess the antiviral effect. We considered a factor to be validated if at least 2 out of 4 siRNAs significantly increased virus replication by 90% (Log2FC ≥ 0.93, p-value < 0.05) compared to a non-targeting (NT) control siRNA (Supplementary Figure S4b) . Those criteria were only met by SMARCA2, ZC3HAV1 (also known as ZAP) and CASP9. As these data were generated in the presence of MxA they suggest that SMARCA2, ZC3HAV1 and CASP9 are required for efficient MxA restriction of H5N1, however, they may also have an antiviral effect independent of MxA. SMARCA2 and CASP9 have an antiviral role only in the presence of MxA. ZC3HAV1 is a restriction factor with a broad antiviral spectrum. However, its activity against IAV is only modest 32, 33 and there is no information about its relevance to MxA restriction. Similarly, for CASP9, an initiator caspase required for the apoptotic pathway, neither association with MxA nor IAV has been shown. SMARCA2 is an ATPase subunit of the BAF chromatin remodeling complex, a complex required for the induction of many genes, including interferon-stimulated genes (ISGs) with anti-IAV activity 34 . To verify that SMARCA2, ZC3HAV1 and CASP9 are required for the antiviral activity of MxA, but do not act as MxA-independent restriction factors, we made use of A549 wild type cells (A549-wt) and the established cell line A549-shMxA which stably overexpresses a short hairpin RNA targeting MxA (shMxA) 16 . Due to the stable expression of shMxA even MxA induced by viral infection is expected to be immediately silenced. Upon infection with H5N1-RL or a Renilla-expressing reporter virus based on the MxA-sensitive IAV strain A/seal/Massachusetts/1/1980 10,11 (H7N7-RL), high reporter activity was observed in A549-wt and A549-shMxA cells but replication was considerably reduced in A549-MxA cells due to the presence of MxA (Supplementary Figure S5a ). siRNA knockdown of MxA (MX1), CASP9 and SMARCA2 increased reporter activity of both viruses by up to ~6-fold and at least 2-fold in A549-MxA cells (2 out of 4 siR-NAs increasing reporter activity) ( Fig. 1e and Supplementary Figure S5b ). On the other hand, in A549-shMxA and A549-wt cells such an increase was not observed upon RNAi-mediated depletion. These data suggest that MxA requires the presence of SMARCA2 and CASP9 to efficiently restrict influenza A viruses and in the absence of MxA, SMARCA2 and CASP9 do not display antiviral properties.
that SMARCA2 is required for the antiviral activity of MxA not only in the context of a reporter virus but also with wild type virus infection, we performed siRNA knockdown as before and infected A549-MxA cells and A549-shMxA cells with the MxA-sensitive H5N1 strain A/Thailand/1(KAN-1)/2004 at an MOI of 0.001 9,18 . 36 hours post infection viral titers were measured by plaque assay and knockdown efficiency was determined by western blot analysis (Fig. 1f) . Silencing of MxA (MX1) in A549-MxA cells elevated the virus titer by approximately 3 log 10 compared to cells treated with the non-targeting control siRNA (NT), in which the virus was restricted to ~5 × 10 4 PFU/mL due to MxA overexpression. Knockdown of SMARCA2 using the most efficient siRNA (Supplementary Figure S5b ,d) resulted in >1 log 10 increase in viral titer relative to siNT in A549-MxA cells (Fig. 1f) . The combination of SMARCA2 and MxA knockdown did not result in a further increase of viral titer over the level of siMxA alone, which is similar to that observed with both wild-type and reporter viruses in siSMARCA2-treated A549-shMxA cells (Fig. 1e ,f, Supplementary Figure S5b ). In summary these data confirm that SMARCA2 is required for efficient antiviral activity of MxA in the context of an H5N1 wild type virus infection.
SMARCA2 is required for ISG induction but not for expression of MxA. SMARCA2 is the ATPase subunit of the BAF chromatin remodeling complex. This complex has been shown to have chromatin remodeling activity either in conjunction with SMARCA2 or another ATPase subunit, SMARCA4, depending on the development stage and cell type investigated [35] [36] [37] . In HeLa cells the SMARCA4-containing BAF complex was shown to be ScientiFic REPORts | (2018) 8:2092 | DOI:10.1038/s41598-018-20458-2 required for induction of 90% of type-I interferon-stimulated genes (ISGs) 8 . However, A549 cells do not express SMARCA4 protein (Supplementary Figure S6a , ref. 38 ), so we aimed to investigate whether SMARCA2 is involved in ISG expression in these cells. A549-wt cells were transfected with siRNAs targeting MxA, JAK1, or SMARCA2 and then treated, or not, with 1000 U/mL IFN-α 48 h after siRNA transfection. 24 h after IFN treatment, the cells were challenged with H7N7-RL. In the absence of IFN no enhancement of viral replication was observed relative to the non-targeting (NT) control siRNA (Fig. 2a) . In IFN-treated A549-wt cells, however, silencing of JAK1, which is a major signal transducer of IFN signaling 39, 40 and required for the IFN-mediated induction of all ISGs, led to a significant increase in viral replication (~15-fold), while knockdown of the single ISG, MxA, elevated viral replication by about 2-fold (Fig. 2a) . Intriguingly, knockdown of SMARCA2 resulted in a ~10-fold increase in virus replication, suggesting that SMARCA2 is indeed required for the establishment of an IFN-inducible antiviral state in A549 cells.
One explanation may be that, as for JAK1, SMARCA2 is required for MxA expression along with other ISGs. Indeed, in the case of JAK1 knockdown, MxA expression is substantially diminished as determined by western blot analysis (Fig. 2a) . But surprisingly SMARCA2 depletion does not alter MxA induction by IFN. This finding leads us to conclude that SMARCA2 is required for robust induction of ISG(s) other than MxA which in turn support the antiviral activity of MxA. Thus, in the absence of SMARCA2, cells expressing MxA should show increased susceptibility to IAV infection. Analysis of SMARCA2-silenced A549-wt cells pretreated with 1000 U/mL IFN-α 24 h prior to H7N7-RL infection revealed that in fact 8. Table S5 ). Gene ontology (GO) term enrichment analysis revealed that the dataset was highly enriched in gene categories associated with IFN alpha and gamma responses (Fig. 3b) which is in line with our previous finding that SMARCA2 is required for establishment of an antiviral state (Fig. 2) .
A total of 144 genes were selected for validation based on the extent of their downregulation after SMARCA2 depletion (top 104 genes with Log 2 FC < −3.57, corresponding to >12-fold downregulation) and their identification as ISGs (interferome.org) in A549 cells (50 genes with Log 2 FC < −2) as well as other cell lines (48 genes with Log 2 FC < −3.5). Another 15 handpicked genes were added, including controls such as SMARCA2, and finally, pseudogenes were filtered out. To investigate which of the SMARCA2-regulated factors are required for the antiviral activity of MxA, siRNA pools were used to silence each gene in A549-MxA cells which were subsequently infected with H7N7-RL. To ensure sufficient induction of the selected factors (and thus allow for knockdown) the cells received 25 U/mL IFN-α 6 h prior to infection, which was the minimal amount found to reduce viral reporter activity (indicative of ISG induction) without diminishing it completely (Supplementary Figure S7a) . None of the siRNAs had cytotoxic effects (Supplementary Figure S7b) . The effect of each siRNA pool on virus replication +/− IFN was determined and ranked according to the strongest increase in viral replication (green) in the absence of IFN (Fig. 3c, Supplementary Figure S7b ). As expected, although the general pattern was similar, greater effects were observed in the presence of IFN, with MxA depletion enhancing replication by 5.9-fold and knockdown of SMARCA2 by 11.2-fold. Several factors displayed clear effects, such as IGFBP3, which increased viral replication by 8-fold upon silencing. Most prominently however, knockdown of the ISG IFITM2 resulted in a 9.5-fold increase in viral replication. Knockdown of IFITM3, on the other hand, which is a relative of IFITM2 and known to be a potent IAV restriction factor 41 , showed only a 3.3-fold increase in virus replication under MxA overexpression conditions. In the absence of MxA (A549-shMxA cells) the antiviral effect of IFITM3 is more visible, and stronger than that of IFITM2, when cells are pre-stimulated with IFN (Fig. 3d) . Generally, the replication-enhancing effects upon knockdown of the most potent SMARCA2-regulated factors appear to depend on the presence of MxA for full effect, as no, or only minor, increases in H7N7-RL reporter activity were observed in A549-shMxA cells, e.g. 2.5-fold with IFITM2 and 3.7-fold with IGFBP3 (Fig. 3d) . To more easily assess whether factors depend on MxA we calculated the ratio of the relative reporter activity between A549-MxA and A549-shMxA cells either with or without IFN-pretreatment and considered all factors with a ratio >2 (Fig. 3e) . The factors with the strongest evidence for being MxA co-factors are: ARHGEF10L, IFITM2, IFITM3, IGFBP3, KCNK3, PARP10, RARRES3, SAMD9L and UBE2L6. In summary these data identify several factors, in particular IFITM2 and IGFBP3, as SMARCA2-regulated, virus-inducible factors required for IAV restriction by MxA.
The MxA GTPase is a potent IFN-inducible restriction factor, inhibiting early steps of the influenza A virus (IAV) replication cycle. In the absence of MxA the ribonucleoprotein-organized viral genome is rapidly transported to the nucleus where viral transcription and genome replication takes place, but this is blocked in the presence of MxA. Although postulated 16 , it remains to be shown whether other cellular factors are involved in mediating the antiviral effects of MxA. We therefore conducted parallel RNAi and protein interaction screens to identify potential MxA cofactors and identified a network of 13 factors supported by both screens. We focused on one particular factor, SMARCA2, which was validated as being required for efficient MxA restriction of both H5N1 and H7N7 IAVs. SMARCA2 (also named BRM) is one of two mutually exclusive ATPase subunits of the evolutionary highly conserved BAF chromatin remodeling complex (also known as the SWI/SNF complex), which has been shown to be involved in regulation of gene expression, cell cycle control and tumorigenesis 35, [42] [43] [44] [45] [46] [47] [48] [49] [50] . Interestingly, the human lung adenocarcinoma cell line, A549, used in our study does not express the other ATPase subunit, SMARCA4 (or BRG1) 38 . Loss or mutation of SMARCA4 seems to be a relatively frequent event during tumorigenesis 51, 52 and SMARCA2 can at least partially compensate for the loss of SMARCA4 [53] [54] [55] . Suffice to say that by using A549 cells we could study the role of SMARCA2 specifically. We were unable to generate A549 SMARCA2 CRISPR knockout cells as cell proliferation was inhibited, which agrees with previous reports [55] [56] [57] . However, with transient knockdown we found that SMARCA2 depletion decreased the ability of IFN-treated A549 cells to establish an antiviral state. This is in agreement with previous findings that the BAF complex is required for induction of a subset of IFN-α-inducible genes 8, 58, 59 , although in these studies SMARCA4/BRG1 was the focus. Surprisingly, however, MxA expression is unaffected by SMARCA2 depletion, suggesting that reduced MxA antiviral function is due to the absence of one or more SMARCA2-regulated factors. Flow cytometry experiments support this by demonstrating that SMARCA2 depletion leads to an elevated number of cells positive for both viral antigen (NP) and MxA in IFN-pretreated A549 cells. These results also provide strong support to the findings of Xiao and colleagues that additional ISGs are required for full MxA activity 16 and further show that these ISGs are probably regulated by SMARCA2. Alternatively MxA may interact with SMARCA2, although this is unlikely as neither SMARCA2 nor any other BAF component was identified as an MxA-interacting candidate in our mass spectrometry analysis. Also, SMARCA2 is a nuclear protein unlike MxA 60 .
A transcriptome analysis on IAV-infected SMARCA2-depleted A549-MxA cells identified 140 genes that strongly depend on the presence of SMARCA2. By far the most significantly enriched gene category was interferon-α response-associated genes, further validating the importance of SMARCA2 to ISG expression, even in the absence of SMARCA4. Cui and colleagues demonstrated that SMARCA4 in HeLa cells constitutively binds to the promoters of the ISGs IFITM1, IFITM2 and IFITM3 resulting in basal level expression and rapid and strong induction upon IFN-α stimulation 8 . We show that the same genes are regulated by SMARCA2 in A549 cells. Finally, we determined that 9 of these SMARCA2-regulated factors are required for full antiviral activity of MxA: ARHGEF10L, IFITM2, IFITM3, IGFBP3, KCNK3, PARP10, RARRES3, SAMD9L and UBE2L6. The application of low levels of IFN-α in these experiments allowed for a larger assay window when detecting ISGs, and this may account for why we failed to detect these factors in the primary RNAi screen. Intriguingly 6 of the 9 host cell factors are ISGs 61 and 2 factors, KCNK3 and IGFBP3, are induced in response to IFN in virus infected cells, so may be either IFN-or virus-inducible. As expected some factors display antiviral activity in the absence of MxA too (e.g. IFITM3, IGFBP3, IFITM2) but others seem to strictly depend on the presence of MxA, such as KCNK3, PARP10 and UBE2L6. Nonetheless, in all cases, the IAV restriction potency of these factors is increased in A549-MxA cells.
The antiviral activity of MxA appears to rely particularly on the presence of IGFBP3 and IFITM2. IGFBP3 (insulin-like growth factor binding protein 3) binds insulin-like growth factors IGF-1 and IGF-2 circulating in the plasma and modulates their growth-promoting effects 62 . Furthermore, IGFBP3 can interact with the IGFBP-3R receptor thereby acting as tumor suppressor 63 and it can be internalized resulting in alterations of cell signaling [64] [65] [66] [67] . It is unclear how IGFBP3 could increase MxA activity and further studies will be required to determine whether it acts as an ISG, as some of our data suggest. IFITM2 belongs to a protein family, the interferon-inducible transmembrane protein family, which is known for its importance in IAV restriction. IFITM proteins are type-I and type-II IFN-inducible cell-intrinsic restriction factors and were first described to have antiviral functions in 1996 by Alber et al. 68 . More recently their significance in IAV restriction was discovered in a genome-wide siRNA screen 41 . However, IFITMs are also active against many other enveloped RNA viruses 41, [69] [70] [71] [72] [73] [74] [75] [76] [77] . In humans three IFITMs are IFN-inducible and display antiviral properties, namely IFITM1, 2 and 3 78 . IAV restriction is mainly mediated by IFITM3, which has similar potency to MxA 16 , while IFITM2 shows an intermediate phenotype and IFITM1 only demonstrates minor effects 79 . For CCR5-tropic HIV-1 and HCV restriction, however, IFITM1 plays the dominant role which is at least in part due to its localization to the plasma membrane 69, 71 . In the case of CCR5-tropic HIV-1 it is believed that IFITM-1 counteracts viral fusion at the plasma membrane to restrict access to the cytosol 69 . Similarly IFITM3 and IFITM2, which only differ by 12 amino acids, are thought to block fusion of IAV with the endosomal membrane 79 . Therefore the main mechanism of restriction by IFITMs is by preventing fusion of viral membranes with cellular lipid bilayers, although other mechanisms have also been proposed 80 . Here, we demonstrate that in the presence of MxA, IFITM2 is the major IFITM member required for IAV restriction. Interestingly, both IFITM2 and MxA are thought to restrict IAV at similar stages of the virus life cycle, with IFITM2 described to act in the late endosome and MxA directly after release of vRNPs from the late endosome 15, 16, 79 . Furthermore, MxA has been shown to associate with membranes 81,82 , therefore it is conceivable that IFITM2 and MxA act in a coordinated sequential fashion in a similar manner as was recently proposed by Narayana et al. for IFITM1, 2 and 3 71 . This study proposed that IFITMs would trap the virus in the endocytic pathway and eventually redirect it to lysosomal degradation. We propose that MxA might cooperate to a small extent with IFITM3 at the early endosome and more strongly with IFITM2 at the late endosome shortly before vRNP release. Intriguingly, Narayana and colleagues already hypothesized that IFITM2 may associate with unknown host factors to restrict viral replication 71 . Apart from IFITM2 and IGFBP3, several other factors were also found to show stronger antiviral effects in the presence of MxA. It is therefore possible that to achieve full viral inhibition all, or several, of the identified factors may have to act in concert with each other, as well as with MxA. Further studies will be required to investigate the individual contribution of these factors and whether a certain combination is needed to fully support the antiviral activity of MxA.
In summary this study not only identifies IFITM2, IGFBP3 and some other IFN-or virus-inducible host factors as being required for the full antiviral activity of MxA, but also further emphasizes the critical role of chromatin remodeling complexes in antiviral immune responses. 
Cell culture. Wild type A549 human cells from lung carcinoma (ATCC ® CCL-185 ™ ), A549 cells stably overexpressing MxA (A549-MxA), A549 cells stably expressing a short hairpin RNA targeting MxA (A549-shMxA) 16 (kindly provided by Richard E. Randall, University of St Andrews, St Andrews, UK), and A549 cells stably expressing streptavidin-tagged MxA (A549-Strep-MxA) or streptavidin-tagged GFP (A549-Strep-GFP) were generated as described below and cultured at 37 °C, 5% CO2 in DMEM medium with FBS (10%) and penicillin-streptomycin (1%). Canine MDCKII cells used for virus titration were cultured under the same conditions. Viruses. The recombinant H5N1 virus (A/Thailand/1(KAN-1)/2004) was generated as described previously 9 . The H7N7 (A/seal/Massachusetts/1/1980) Renilla luciferase reporter virus harboring a multibasic HA cleavage site was obtained as published by Reuther and colleagues 23 . Briefly, the splice donor and splice acceptor sites in the NS gene-encoding sequence were silenced. The overlapping NS1 and the NEP open reading frames were separated and the Renilla luciferase-encoding sequence was introduced in between. To obtain 3 separated gene products porcine teschovirus-1 2A peptide-encoding sequences were introduced in between the 3 ORFs (for a more detailed description also see Fig. S1a ). The same procedure was applied to generate the H5N1 (A/ Vietnam/1203/2004) Renilla luciferase virus. However, in this case a virus encoding a monobasic HA cleavage site was generated by altering the cleavage site as described previously 24, 25 . All recombinant viruses were plaque purified on MDCKII cells. Virus stocks were either prepared on MDCKII cells or in 8 days old embryonated chicken eggs and titers were determined by plaque assay. siRNA screen. A primary genome-wide screen assessing the role of 18119 genes was performed using siRNA pools of 4 siRNAs transfected into A549-MxA. A non-targeting siRNA (GE Dharmacon D-001810-10) and an MxA-targeting siRNA (Qiagen SI05459538) served as negative and positive control, respectively. The cells were seeded in 384-well plates (2800 cells/well) and reverse transfected with siRNAs (final concentration 10 nM) using DharmaFECT4 transfection reagent (0.125 µL/well). Each 384-well plate was run in triplicate. After 72 hours, the cells were infected with the H5N1 Renilla luciferase reporter virus at an MOI of 8 for 24 hours. Luciferase activity was analyzed by adding Renilla luciferase substrate (5 µl, Renilla-Glo Luciferase Assay System, Promega) and read using the Envision Multilabel plate reader (PerkinElmer). A secondary screen was performed on 276 genes by individually transfecting the 4 siRNAs from the pool used in the primary screen. The rest of the procedure was performed as described above. The siRNAs library plates were provided by GE Healthcare Dharmacon Inc. (human siGENOME SMARTpool library G-005005) and siRNAs were resuspended at a concentration of 2 μM. Lysates were clarified by centrifugation at 3500 × g for 20 min. 50 µL of cleared supernatant was retained as an 'Input' sample. The remaining 950 µL was added to 550 µL IP buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl, pH7.4, 150 mM NaCl, and 1 mM EDTA) containing 20 µL equivalent bead volume of Strep-Tactin Sepharose beads (IBA Lifesciences). Affinity tag binding proceeded with rotation at 4 °C for 2 hours. Beads were centrifuged at 300 × g for 3 minutes. 50 µL of cleared supernatant was retained as an 'Unbound Flow Through' sample, and the remaining supernatant was discarded. The beads were washed twice in IP buffer containing 0.05% NP-40 and twice in IP buffer with no detergent.
Streptactin-purified proteins were reduced and alkylated on beads with 20 µL reduction-alkylation buffer [50 mM Tris-HCl, pH8.0, 2 M Urea, 1 mM DTT, 3 mM iodoacetamide] and incubated in the dark for 45 minutes with gentle shaking. An additional 3 mM DTT was added to quench the reaction, and proteins were digested with 0.75 µg trypsin (Invitrogen) overnight at 37 °C. The next day, the beads were centrifuged at 300 × g for 3 minutes. The peptide-containing supernatant was collected and formic acid was added to a final concentration of 1% to acidify the peptides. Peptides were desalted using Agilent OMIX C18 10 µL tips according to the manufacturer's protocol with the following modifications. Briefly, tips were conditioned with 50% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid and then equilibrated by two rinses with 0.1% formic acid. Peptides were bound by repeated pipetting, rinsed twice in 0.1% formic acid, and eluted in 50% acetonitrile. A second elution in 90% acetonitrile was used to ensure complete recovery. Peptides were dried under vacuum centrifugation and suspended in 12 µL of 3.0% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid.
Digested peptides were subjected to LC-MS/MS analysis using an Easy-nLC 1000 coupled to a dual-pressure linear ion trap (Velos Pro) Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA). Online LC separation was performed using a 75 µm × 25 cm fused silica IntegraFrit capillary packed with 1.9 µm Reprosil-Pur C18 AQ reversed-phase resin (Dr. Maisch-GmbH). Peptides were eluted by a gradient of 5% to 30% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid in 110 minutes delivered at a flow rate of 300 nL/minute. For each cycle, one full MS scan (150-1500 m/z, resolution of 120,000) in the Orbitrap was followed by 20 data-dependent MS/ MS scans fragmented by normalized collision energy (setting of 35%) and acquired in the linear ion trap. Target ions already acquired in MS/MS scans were dynamically excluded for 20 seconds. Raw MS files were analyzed by MaxQuant 31 version 1.3.0.3 and MS/MS spectra searched by the Andromeda search engine 83 against a database containing SwissProt human and influenza protein sequences (20,226 total) 84 . All runs for a given bait were analyzed simultaneously to maximize the "match between runs" algorithm available on MaxQuant. Multiplicity was ScientiFic REPORts | (2018) 8:2092 | DOI:10.1038/s41598-018-20458-2 set to 1 and a false discovery rate of 0.01 imposed for peptide and protein identification. Normalization of raw peptide intensities and protein level abundance inference were calculated using the linear mixed-effects model built into the MSstats R package version 3.3.10 30 . Proteins that appeared in a single biological replicate were excluded from further analysis. Network analysis. The results from both genomic and proteomic screens were combined and analyzed using Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (IPA ® , Qiagen) to look at the gene ontology, canonical pathways, regulators and protein-protein interaction enrichment. Considering all terms with p-value < 0.01, we identified 13 factors present in all enrichment categories. A protein-protein interaction network showing the physical interactions within these 13 factors was also generated using IPA ® (Qiagen). siRNA validation. A549-MxA cells were seeded in 96-well plates (7600 cells/well) and reverse transfected with siRNA using Lipofectamine RNAiMAX (0.2 μL/well) at a final siRNA concentration of 30 nM. 72 hours after transfection cells were infected with the H5N1 Renilla luciferase reporter virus at an MOI of 8 for 24 hours. Luciferase activity was analyzed by adding 20 µl luciferase substrate (Renilla-Glo Luciferase Assay System, Promega) per well and read using the Glomax multiplus plate reader (Promega) or the Infinite M200 Microplate reader (Tecan). All experiments were performed at least in technical triplicates. Bioinformatics analysis of RNA-Seq. Illumina HiSeq. 50 bp single-end reads from RNA-Seq libraries were first adaptor trimmed and then analyzed using the TopHat and Cufflinks software. TopHat (v2.0.13) was utilized for alignment of short reads to the reference genome. To analyze gene expression, Cufflinks (v2.2.1) was utilized for transcript assembly and differential expression, and cummeRbund (v2.0.0) for visualization of differential analysis. Default parameters were used.
Additional methods can be found in the supplementary information.
Data availability. Any reagent will be shared and distributed to other investigators upon request for research purposes and upon signing of a standard material transfer agreement from the relevant institute if necessary.