Background: Respiratory viruses, such as influenza viruses, initially infect the upper airways but can manifest as severe lower respiratory tract infections in high-risk patients with significant morbidity and mortality. For syndromic diagnosis, several multiplex nucleic acid amplification tests have been developed for clinics, of which SureX 13 Respiratory Pathogen Multiplex Kit (ResP) can simultaneously detect 13 pathogens directly from airway secretion specimens. The organisms identified are influenza virus A, influenza virus A pdmH1N1 (2009), influenza virus A H3N2, influenza virus B, adenovirus, boca virus, rhinovirus, parainfluenza virus, coronavirus, respiratory syncytial virus, human metapneumovirus, Mycoplasma pneumoniae, and Chlamydia.
Acute respiratory infections (ARIs) are common and contribute significantly to morbidity and mortality. They are the leading causes of outpatient visits and hospitalizations in all age groups, especially for children under 5 years of age. 1 Most ARIs in children and outpatients are caused by nine common respiratory viruses, including respiratory syncytial virus (RSV), influenza virus A, influenza virus B, rhinovirus, adenovirus, parainfluenza virus, coronavirus, human metapneumovirus, and boca virus 2, 3 Additionally, atypical pathogens, such as Mycoplasma pneumoniae, are also major causes of ARIs in children. The symptoms caused by these pathogens are largely similar, thus definitive diagnosis requires effective laboratory testing. By using multiplex assay targeting these pathogens, early diagnosis can be made in a timely manner. Consequential antimicrobial or antiviral therapy may thus be administrated promptly and appropriately. 4 Most importantly, the early diagnosis of influenza viruses, which are contagious, is beneficial for early isolation of patients, thus reducing the spread of influenza viruses.
The routine clinical laboratory testing for respiratory viruses is largely conducted by direct fluorescent-antibody assays and rapid antigen tests in China. Given the poor sensitivity and complicated manual operation, these methods have been gradually replaced by nucleic acid amplification tests (NAATs), which are more sensitive and more specific. However, majority of the NAAT kits are based on real-time polymerase chain reaction (PCR), which can only detect one or two pathogens of ARIs within a single tube, thus are not syndromic testing. 5 The clinical and economic impacts of syndromic testing for respiratory pathogens have been evaluated in several studies. Overall, the implementation of syndromic testing can decrease the time of diagnosis, 4 decreased healthcare resource utilization, 6 decrease inpatient length of stay and time in isolation, 7 and improve antiviral use for influenza virus-positive patients. 8 SureX 13 Respiratory Pathogen Multiplex Kit (ResP) is a syndromic multiplex molecular test for simultaneous detection of 13 pathogens in a single tube. The aim of this study was to evaluate the application of the ResP for detection of respiratory pathogens in outpatients with flu-like manifestations.
The inclusion criteria for this study were as follows: (a) patients admitted to hospitals between Feb. 2017 and Aug. 2018; (b) oropharyngeal swabs were collected from hospitals and Centers for Disease Control in Guangzhou; (c) patients had the following flu-like manifestations: (a) fever (>38°C); (b) cough or sore throat. After sampling, specimens were kept in 4°C and transferred to the laboratory for testing within one week.
The specimen was shaken vigorously for 5 minutes in phosphatebuffered saline solution, centrifuged at 9.6 g for 20 minutes, and the supernatant was aspirated. About 50 µL of RNA was extracted from 140 µL supernatant using the QIAamp Viral RNA extraction kit (QIAGEN, Hilden, Germany), according to the manufacture's instruction and was stored at −80°C. 
The nucleic acid was subjected to multiplex amplification for all specimens using SureX instructions. Each pathogen, if detectable, produced a distinctive fragment size after PCR amplification. The results of fragment analysis were used to determine the outcomes of testing. In brief, if the peak height of a targeted fragment size is lower than the lower peak of the signal standard, the targeted pathogen is determined negative; if the peak height of a targeted fragment size is higher than the higher peak of the signal standard, the targeted pathogen is determined positive; if the peak height of a targeted fragment size is between the higher and the lower peaks of the signal standard, the targeted pathogen is determined uncertain and the test should be repeated.
The results were analyzed using EXCEL2007. The Cohen's kappa 
A total of 420 oropharyngeal swabs were enrolled from 10 hospitals and 10 CDCs in Guangzhou from 2017 to 2018. Samples were collected from a wide range of ages, with the average age of 27.2 (Table 1) . About 55% specimens were from male. Chlamydia. In six of the ten detected pathogens, the Cohen's kappa 
Multiplex PCR-based NAATs have been increasingly used for syndromic diagnosis, due to their high throughput, high sensitivity, high specificity, cost-effectiveness, and great clinical significance. [10] [11] [12] The ResP assay is based on multiplex PCR amplification and capillary electrophoretic separation of PCR amplicons by length. This technique has been used for pathogen detection and subtype classification of pediatric acute lymphoblastic leukemia. 13, 14 By comparing the results with a standard size marker of targeted pathogens, pathogens in samples can be separated and identified as expected. 15 The subtypes of most viruses were not designed to be further distinguished by this assay, except for influenza virus A. The influenza virus A pdmH1N1 (2009) and H3N2 are the two subtypes which are most popular in China recently. Therefore, a patient whose specimen is positive for influenza virus A but negative for influenza virus A pdmH1N1 (2009) or H3N2 is probably infected by an uncommon influenza virus A, such as H7N9, H5N1, H5N6 avian influenza virus A [16] [17] [18] and has to be immediately quarantined once it is confirmed. It should be noted that F I G U R E 2 A negative result from the multiple PCR assay ResP. X-axis represents the sizes of amplification products and Y-axis represents the signal strength. huRNA, human RNA; huDNA, human DNA; IC, internal control Further investigation is needed to evaluate the performance of ResP on these pathogens.
In conclusion, the performance of ResP showed a high-degree agreement with pathogen-specific PCRs in oropharyngeal swabs from outpatients. The implementation of ResP may facilitate the diagnosis of respiratory infections in a variety of clinical scenarios.
The study was supported by the grants from the National Science 