Chimpanzee KIR haplotypes.
Gene sequences were aligned with MAFFT [3] and corrected manually. The alignment was then divided into fourteen segments, as previously described [4] . Each segment was analyzed with four methods:
Bayesian, maximum-likelihood (ML), neighbor-joining (NJ) and parsimony. NJ phylogenetic analysis was performed with MEGA4 [5] using the Maximum Composite Likelihood method with 500 replicates. PAUP*4.0b10 [6] and the tree bisection-reconnection branch swapping algorithm were used for parsimony analyses with 500 replicates and a heuristic search. ML analyses were performed with RAXML7 [7] under the GTR+CAT model with 500 replicates (rapid bootstrapping). For the Bayesian analysis we selected the model of DNA substitution using MODELTEST3.7 [8] and the Akaike information criterion. Bayesian phylogenetic analyses used MRBAYES3.1.2 [9] ; sampling was performed with one cold chain and three heated chains, which were run for 2,000,000 generations. Trees were sampled every 250 generations and the first 4,000 trees were discarded before a consensus tree was generated. In all analyses the average standard deviation of split frequencies for the three runs was <0.01.
Recombination breakpoints in chimpanzees were identified using RDP [10] and confirmed by phylogenetic analyses and alignment inspection.
For the lineage III KIR genes, a full gene analysis was performed on all fourteen segments; the Pt-KIR3DS6 genomic sequence used in this analysis was obtained from the assembly of the chimpanzee genome available from the UCSC genome browser (March 2006 build; http://genome.ucsc.edu). This sequence lacks only ~1.5kb at the end of the gene (approximately the region from intron 7 to the 3'UTR).
Pt-KIR3DL1/2 and Pt-KIR3DL3 were renamed Pt-KIR3DL1/2a and Pt-KIR3DL1/2b, respectively, an allelic relationship supported both by segregation analyses [1] and by sequencing ( Figure 1A ). This change also eliminates confusion between this telomeric framework gene of the chimpanzee KIR locus (now named Pt-KIR3DL1/2) and KIR3DL3 the centromeric framework gene of the human KIR locus.
Consistent with this rationalization, Pt-KIRC1, the centromeric framework gene of the chimpanzee KIR locus and orthologous to human KIR3DL3 in the five exons encoding leader sequence and Ig domains was renamed Pt-KIR3DL3. The sequence characterized as Pt-KIR3DL6 in an analysis of KIR cDNA sequences in chimpanzees [1] was renamed Pt-KIR3DS6 following re-analysis of the cytoplasmic tail sequence of this KIR, as described in the following section.
While investigating KIR expression in chimpanzee Clint (see paragraph 'KIR expression study'), a KIR was identified that had sequence identical to that of the Pt-KIR3DL6 cDNA [1] except for insertion of one base pair at the end of exon 7. This inserted adenosine, part of a run of eight adenosines, changed the reading frame, leading to an early stop codon and loss of the two ITIM in the cytoplasmic tail of Pt-KIR3DL6. Because this sequence encodes an activating receptor it was named Pt-KIR3DS6 ( Figure   S10A ). An independent observation of Pt-KIR3DS6 has been made (Genbank accession numbers with the latter likely being artifacts of PCR slippage [11] .
Because Pt-KIR3DS6 is the only KIR not represented in the three sequenced haplotypes of Figure Eve revealed a sequence related to Pt-KIR3DL4 and 3DS2 but these sequences could not be unambiguously assigned to one particular group without the sequence of exons encoding the transmembrane and cytoplasmic tail. For Lucas and Duff, for whom peripheral blood mononuclear cells were available, KIR cDNA sequences were amplified as described in the 'KIR expression study' section above. This analysis showed that both individuals have 3DS2, but the alleles were highly related to Pt-KIR3DL4 for the 5' exons (encoding extracellular domains) and to Pt-KIR2DS4 for the 3' exons (encoding transmembrane and cytoplasmic domains). However, these novel 3DS2 sequences shared unique substitutions with previously characterized 3DS2 sequences in exon 6, encoding the Stem.
Because these single-nucleotide polymorphisms appeared unique to Pt-KIR3DS2, this property was used to design a 'Nested' primer set. 
The sequence-specific primer (SSP) method was used. Pt-KIR2DL4, 2DL5, 3DL1/2a and b, and 3DL5
were typed using the primers previously described [1] , new primers were developed for the other nine
with the same primer set or with a different primer set; when positive reactions were observed with one primer set but not with a second, the products were cloned and sequenced to confirm the specificity.
When possible, primer sets were combined to produce a single set that amplifies all alleles of the targeted KIR. Unless otherwise mentioned, all the new PCR amplifications used the following cycling parameters: initial denaturation at 95°C for 3min, then 32 cycles with a denaturation at 95°C for 20sec, an annealing at 63°C for 45sec, and an extension at 72°C for 2min. 
Reconstruction of haplotype structures from genotype data was performed with HAPLO-IHP [12] . For this analysis, genotypic data were used: from the 39 individuals of Figure 1B , as well as the three reference haplotypes of Figure 1A . Pt-KIR3DL3, 2DL4 and 3DL1/2 were set as framework genes. The two KIR haplotypes of Donald (a member of the panel) were fully sequenced so his KIR genotype was entered with inclusion of the copy number for each KIR. Sequences of two Pt-KIR3DL4 alleles defined by cDNA clones obtained from chimpanzee Lucas were also included.
Since none of the three sequenced chimpanzee haplotypes have all 13 KIR genes, the relative position of some KIR genes is ambiguous: first, the position of Pt-KIR3DL5 is not known when it belongs to a haplotype with 3DL4 and/or with 2DS4-2DL7; second, the position of 3DS6-2DL6 is not known when they belong to haplotypes with 3DS2-2DL9. The gene order used in Figures 1 and 2 is thus arbitrary for these KIR.
For the MHC sequence analysis, we gathered all non-human hominoid MHC-B and -C and non-macaque
Old World monkey MHC-B sequences from the IPD-MHC database [13] . Human sequences were 9 obtained from the IMGT/HLA database [14] and included one to three sequences for each HLA-B and -C sublineage as well as all HLA-B alleles encoding allotypes with V76. Macaque sequences were obtained from studies in Macaca mulatta [15] and Macaca fascicularis [16] . MHC-E sequences were used as the outgroup. Sequences with recombinant or missing segments in the α1 or α2 were excluded, recombinant α3 domains were masked. Alignment of the α1, α2 and α3 domains and phylogenetic analyses were conducted as described for KIR genomic analyses. For the Bayesian analysis three independent long runs were performed (10,000,000 generations) and the final average standard deviation of split frequencies was <0.04.
Ancestral sequences were reconstructed with CODEML of the PAML4 software package [17] , using the marginal reconstruction approach. Two codon models were used for this analysis: M0, the simplest model (implements a single dN/dS rate), and M2a, a model allowing for positive selection (three dN/dS categories). Analysis was first performed with the simplest model (M0), and when nodes were not fully resolved by M0 (p>0.95), reconstruction was also performed with model M2a.
For selection analyses, dN/dS (ω) ratios were estimated by maximum likelihood using PAML4 [17] with the F3X4 model of codon frequencies. ML tree topologies (generated using the approach described in the 'KIR Genomic Analyses') were used for these analyses and three sets of likelihood ratio tests were conducted to compare null models that do not allow ω>1 (M1a, M7 and M8a) with models that do (M2a and M8). Significance was assessed by comparing twice the difference in likelihood between the models (2ΔL) to a χ2 distribution with one (M8a/M8) or two (M1a/M2 and M7/M8) degrees of freedom.
Codons with ω>1 were identified using the Bayes Empirical Bayes approach [18] . Positively selected positions in D1 and D2 were marked in the KIR2DL2-HLA-Cw3 three-dimensional structure (PDB file 1EFX [19] ) using the software PyMOL [20] .