Airline ticket sales and flight itinerary data were obtained from the International Air Transport Association (IATA) to analyze the travel pattern of all passengers initiating trips from any airport in ( where is the proportion of SEA residents in all travelers from each SEA country into China. To estimate monthly , we first calculated country-specific annual σ using annual statistics of the numbers of SEA residents traveling into China and Chinese travelers returning into China by SEA country, obtained from the China National Tourism Administration (www.cnta.gov.cn/zwgk/lysj/). To account for the variations between monthly and annual proportions, and between routes, we then assumed that monthly had an SD of 10% annual proportion and sampled 10,000 sets for dengue importation risk estimation.
The official statistics of dengue cases reported by 17 (www.google.com) was queried with keywords, such as "Dengue", year and name of country in English, to identify the aggregated data of dengue epidemics from English language news releases. The data sources and collation were detailed in Table A. As dengue infection by any dengue virus can produce a wide spectrum of illness, with most infections are asymptomatic or subclinical, cases reported in passive surveillance systems may be under-recognized. To account for the substantial underreporting of dengue incidence in official statistics, the monthly dengue data reported by nine countries was further adjusted as
where , is the monthly number of cases reported by country s in month m, is an expansion factor (EF) of each country, and is the proportion of symptomatic cases in dengue infections. The EF has been commonly used to estimate the total number of dengue incidence from officially statistics (2) (3) (4) . We estimated the country-specific EF and its 95% UI (Table B) based on Undurraga et al (4) , who derived EFs through a systematic analysis of published studies that reported original, empirically derived EFs or the necessary data to obtain them (3) . For countries where no empirical studies were available, data were extrapolated based on the statistically significant inverse relationship between an index of a country's health system quality and its observed reporting rate. Based on previous evidence, we assumed that the apparent illness ( ) represents approximately 20% (SD 10%) of all dengue infections (5, 6) . Additionally, to compute the incidence rate for each country, the country-and year-specific population data of SEA were obtained from the World Bank (data.worldbank.org/), and the population data in China were obtained from the National Bureau of Statistics of China.
We used wavelet analysis to characterize the periodicity of dengue transmission and the coherency of seasonal patterns between SEA and China, based on the methods described by van Panhuis et al (7) . First, the monthly incidence rates for countries in SEA and China were de-trended by subtracting fitted values from the observed values by a linear model, and centred (discounted the mean) and reduced (divided by the SD) to z scores to increase cross-country comparability. Then, the continuous wavelet transforms with the complex Morlet wave using a nondimensional frequency ω0 = 6 and a periodicity step size δ j of 0.25 on a linear scale were conducted for each country to enable the extraction of a high resolution of the periodicity scale (1-mo intervals) and obtain phase angles to represent epidemic timing (7) (8) (9) . Finally, we measured wavelet coherency between dengue transmission time series in SEA and dengue importation time series from SEA into China. The wavelet coherency uses wave transforms of two time-series to indicate their localized phase relationship in a timefrequency spectrum. Statistical significance of wavelet coherency was tested using Monte Carlo methods (n = 600) (7, 10) .
To quantify the seasonality and the risk of DENV importation and spread within China, we constructed a branching process model ( Figure G ) that included both importation and onward autochthonous transmission risk estimates, with the probabilistic risk ranging from zero to one.
The probability (p IMPORT ) of at least one DENV-infected traveler importation via air travel from SEA and being infectious after arriving China was defined as a single-step The monthly probabilities of dengue importation by origin and destination were estimated as follows:
Based on the Poisson distribution of DENV importation risk and , , defined above, where , refers to the number of mosquitoes per person in a location i and month m, α is the daily biting rate, β HM refers to the probability of transmission given an infectious blood meal, and β MH is the probability of transmission given an infectious bite, V refers to the number of days a human is infectious, , is the proportion of mosquitoes surviving the extrinsic incubation period, and , is the number of days an infectious mosquito survives. Given the airport mainly serviced for the local regions, we assumed that the travelers with DENV infections arrived at the cities or provinces of destinations without further cross-city or province movement during infectious period.
To estimate the number of infectious mosquitoes produced per infected human ( 0 , ) and the number of humans infected per infectious mosquito ( 0 , ) in introduced transmission model, the parameters were defined as below:
Human infectious period (V): As patients are typically viremic for 3-5 days, and mosquitoes can become infected by dengue virus (DENV) when biting viremic hosts, we assumed V was 4 days (SD 1 day). (13) Mosquito biting rate (α): A detailed study of blood meals suggests that Ae. aegypti feed 0.63-0.76 times per day. (17) We assumed that Ae. albopictus behaved similarly and α used a mean of 0.7 blood meals per day (SD 0.05) as previous study. (12) Human-to-mosquito transmissibility (β HM ): β HM is the probability of a mosquito acquiring DENV while feeding on a viremic human. As we estimated the human infectious period based on the 50% infectious dose, we assumed that β HM was 0.5 (SD 0.1).
Mosquito-to-human transmissibility (β MH ): Transmissibility of DENV from infected mosquitoes to humans is unknown, yet it is likely less than 100%. We assumed that the probability was 0.5 (SD 0.1).
Extrinsic incubation period (EIP): EIP is the period in the mosquito after acquiring the virus and prior to being able to transmit the virus. Temperature-specific data for DENV are limited to the range of 26-30°C. (18) We assumed that the average EIP at 28°C
(EIP28) was 6 days (SD 2 days) and the relationship with temperature (T) was β T = −0.08 (SD 0.02). (18) We sampled from both distributions to estimate the mean EIP for each location as:
Mosquito survival (γ and L): The mortality of Aedes mosquitoes in the field depends on many factors including weather and species. (19) The mean mortality for Ae.
albopictus and Ae. aegypti across temperature was estimated by fitting a polynomial curve, ( ), to the relationship between temperature and average daily mortality.(12,
We then assumed that the month-and location-specific average mosquito lifespan (L) was 1/µ(T) days with a SD of 2 days. To incorporate the uncertainty associated with both mosquito mortality and the EIP, the proportion of mosquitoes surviving in the EIP was then calculated as:
We assumed that there were 1-3 mosquitoes per person, an average of 2 (SD 1) under ideal weather conditions. To account for the populationwide effects of increased mortality at temperature extremes, we estimated the density was proportional to the minimum mortality:
where φ is the density under ideal weather conditions, L i,m is a location-and monthspecific, temperature-dependent lifespan, and max L is the maximum mean lifespan of vectors. 