These 35 contributors and reviewers included 17 adult intensivists, 3 paediatric intensivists, 5 infectious diseases specialists, 4 public health specialists, 2 obstetricians, 2 radiologists, 1 emergency medicine specialist, and 1 clinical pharmacist. Most were based in USA (18), with the remainder from Canada (4), South Africa (2), UK (2), Australia (1), Dominican Republic (1), Germany (1), Hong Kong SAR (1), India (1), Japan (1), Mexico (1), Nepal (1), and Switzerland (1) . 
The first pilot, a sub-regional Workshop on Critical Management of Respiratory Diseases in Trinidad and Tobago, 5-7 April 2011, was sponsored by the Pan American Health Organization and the Ministries of Health of eleven Caribbean countries (Trinidad and Tobago, Anguilla, Grenada, Belize, Jamaica, Bahamas, St. Vincent and the Grenadines, Antigua, St. Lucia, and Dominica). Twenty-nine participants (physicians and nurses) attended the course (Table S2) from these countries.
The second pilot was the Workshop on Critical Management of Severe Acute Respiratory Infections in Bogor, Indonesia, 30 April-3 May 2012 and was sponsored by the Indonesian Ministry of Health and the Perhimpunan Dokter Intensive Care Indonesia (Indonesian Intensive Care Society, PERDICI). Indonesia had been identified as a priority country to receive this training because of the numerous fatal human cases of avian influenza A [1] . Thirty-eight participants from ten Indonesian provinces attended the course (Table S2) . They were approximately evenly divided between doctors and nurses. Most (n=24, 63.2%) worked at public referral hospitals for avian influenza A.
The third pilot consisted of Short Courses on Clinical Management of Severe Influenza Virus Infection, were conducted in Hanoi and Ho Chi Minh City, Vietnam, 7-9 and 13-15 May 2013, sponsored by the Vietnamese Ministry of Health and the National Hospital of Tropical Disease (Hanoi). Vietnam had been identified as a priority country to receive this training because of the high numbers of fatal human cases of avian influenza A (H5N1) [2, 3] . Course materials (computer-based slides and toolkit) were translated into Vietnamese. The course was delivered in English, with simultaneous interpretation. Eighty-six participants from 49 provinces, all doctors, representing provincial and national hospitals, attended the course (Table S2) . 