: (A) Temperature dependence of yeast invertase-FPc conjugate (Inv-FPc) activity. At each temperature, a 1.8 uL mixture containing 1.8 μg Inv-FPc/FP/MBs and 250 mM sucrose was incubated for 3 min, followed by measurement of glucose yielded using a glucometer. (B) Time dependence of yeast invertase inactivation. After pre-heating at 55 o C for variable periods of time (0 min, 5 min, 10 min, 15 min, and 30 min) in the absence of sucrose, 50 μg/mL yeast invertase (270 kDa) was mixed with 500 mM sucrose at a 1:1 volume ratio and further incubated at 55 o C, followed by a glucometer measurement every 5 min. (C) Time dependence of thermostable yeast invertase (TmINV) inactivation. Experiments were similar to those shown for Figure S1B , except that 10 μg/mL thermostable invertase (55 kDa) was used. This represents an equimolar concentration (mole/L) of invertase as in Figure S1B . For all experiments in Figures S1B and S1C, 25 mg/dl glucose was also manually spiked into the sucrose solution to guarantee there was a readable signal on the glucometer. Figure S2 . Detection of DNA mimic of the LAMP loop (1A-T) using the OSD-to-glucose transduction. 1A-T directly initiates a one-step strand displacement (OSD) reaction to release the Inv-FPc reporter sequence from the capture FP sequence conjugated to magnetic beads. After magnetic separation, the released Inv-FPc reporter sequence is then detected by the production of glucose by the conjugated invertase and readout via a glucometer. (A) Kinetic curves of glucose generation in presence of different concentrations of 1A-T and 1 μM non-specific sequence (Random sequence). (B) Concentration dependence of 1A-T using the 40 min glucometer signal collected from Figure S2A . For these assays a commercially available yeast invertase was used with 1 hour 25 o C OSD. Figure S3 . Agarose gel electrophoretic characterization of LAMP amplicons produced from target and non-target templates. N-1, N-2, P-1, P-2, P-3 represent LAMP reactions amplified from 2E2 copies, 2E4 copies, and 2E6 copies of MERS-CoV sORF1A DNA (=MERS), buffer control, and 7E5 copies of non-specific target control (RPOB), in presence of the MERS-CoV specific primer set, OSF1A.55. N-3 represents LAMP reaction amplified from 7E5 copies of non-specific target control (RPOB) in presence of a RPOB specific primer set. For each sample, LAMP reaction is carried out at 55 o C for 1.5 hour. Then a 5 µl aliquot of the each reaction mixed with 3 µl of 6 × DNA loading dye is analyzed by electrophoresis through a 1% agarose gel containing ethidium bromide. Figure S7 . Detection of synthetic ZEBOV DNA (ZEBOV-VP30) using LAMP-to-glucose transduction in synthetic sputum or human saliva. Glucometer responses to 1E2 copies (P-1), 1E3 copies (P-2) and 1E4 copies (P-3) of synthetic ZEBOV VP30 (= ZEBOV) or to a DNA buffer control (0 copies, N-1) in the presence of (A) 26% treated mucin synthetic sputum or (B) 20% treated human saliva. Reaction conditions were as in Figure 3 . The error bars represent standard deviations calculated from two parallel assays. The thermostable TmINV was used in these experiments.