The Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of 1996 (HIPAA) BioFire is not a BA and a Data Use Agreement (DUA) between the laboratory and BioFire addresses the export of FilmArray data to the Trend database. Demonstrating that Trend database does not contain PHI has been critical to recruiting institutions to this project.
The HIPAA Privacy Rule allows for release of patient data without prior authorization as long as it has been properly de-identified [50] . There are two acceptable routes to de-identification, 1) the Safe Harbor approach wherein the data are stripped of an enumerated list of 18 identifiers classified as PHI and there is no indication (i.e., actual knowledge), that the remaining information would lead back to the individual and 2) the Expert Determination approach wherein a person with experience in relevant statistical and scientific principles evaluates the PHI in conjunction with other reasonably available records, establishes a protocol for de-identification and certifies that the protocol allows only a small risk that PHI may be disclosed to an anticipated recipient.
The goal of the Trend project is to provide a near real-time view of the changes in pathogen prevalence; therefore, it is important to be able to retrieve the date when a FilmArray test is performed. However, retrieving the date conflicts with the Safe Harbor approach because the date of a test is PHI (the year of the test is not PHI but working with just the year defeats the purpose of tracking prevalence through the season). For this reason we followed the Expert Determination approach to manage data export.
The study took into consideration data that are available on participating clinical laboratory FilmArray Instruments, BioFire's own customer database, the proposed Trend database and publicly available data sources. We analyzed how combinations of this information could be used by an adversary to identify an individual in the dataset thereby disclosing PHI [82] . The results of this study (summarized in Multimedia Appendix 2 Table) provided recommendations for development and site enrollment criteria for Trend, and for BioFire operating procedures.
In accord with the recommended actions, information in the fields that may be used to distinguish a patient is obfuscated (through truncation or binning) to ensure that a combination of these fields cannot be used to identify a specific patient [50] . For example, the time and date of the test are dynamically binned so that a minimum number of tests of one panel type are included in each bin prior to export. This ensures that a sufficient quantity of test results are uploaded to the database from one site at one time so that there is very low risk that patient identity can be inferred from knowledge of the start time of the test.
If an adversary were to infiltrate the safeguards of the database, and wished to know specific patient test results from a specific location on a given day, no unique records would exist. The combination of deleting the sample identification field, binning the test date range, and truncating the FilmArray pouch serial number ensures that the remaining information is never unique, which indicates that there is a low risk of misuse of data. 
High (likely continually associated with a patient)
Medium (may be selfdisclosed in public)
Limited to sites drawing from a minimum population (e.g., >20,000 individuals by census). Instrument Name Low (not associated with patient)
No Action