Here we revisit the data of two hospital outbreaks of LF that occurred in Jos, Nigeria in 1970 [1] and in Zorzor, Liberia in 1972 [2] by looking at the e↵ective reproduction number to estimate the severity of the diseases. A description of the Jos outbreak is presented below, while the full networks of contacts of 23 and 11 patients for the two respective outbreaks are presented in Figures 1.A and 1 .B in the main text. For the Jos oubreak, TS is the index case, however other contacts are possible, for example case RA is a member of hospital sta↵. It is likely that this person was a source of exposure to other people working in the hospital, (e.g. the nurse MA and the cleaner AA) or spending a long time in the same ward (e.g. case FT, who was admitted to the ward for chronic renal disease). Extra hospital infections were plausible through case FT.
A brother-in-law of TS, visited her while she was in the hospital and became ill too. Within two months another 23 people became ill, 16 of them were directly exposed to TS, while four other cases (EE, TI, EE2, SE) are probably instances of extra-hospital transmission within a single family as the three children EE, EE2, SE never visited the ward (see Figure 1 .A in the main text). The most striking feature of the Jos outbreak is the apparent transmission of Lassa infection from one person to possibly 16 others exposed to her in the hospital ward. There is no indication of exchange of infected body-fluids such as blood-infected needles. According to [1] :
In one respect, the illness of TS did di↵er from most: there was severe pulmonary involvement.
The original diagnosis had, in fact, been pneumonia. TS was, moreover, placed in a corner bed on ward A across which a prevailing breeze blew to the rest of the ward. Such a combination of factors could favour airborne spread of virus, but there is no firm basis for any conclusion.
To support this hypothesis, Lassa virus was also isolated from the throat of patients who at the time had no objective signs of pharyngitis [3, 4] .
The possible network of contacts is presented in table S1. Co-presence at the ward included visitors caring for a relative and patients admitted for other illness. The period of exposure to the index case TS, is provided by Carey et al. [1] and it is represented by the thin red lines in Figure 1 (main text), for both the original and the randomly permuted networks. If the source of exposure is a friend/relative then the period of exposure is calculated since the source developed illness. If the source of exposure is a member of the hospital sta↵, then the period of exposure was calculated since the source developed illness with the condition that to the exposed case was at the ward during this time. If the source of exposure is a patient not related with the exposed case, then the period of exposure was calculated since the source was admitted to hospital with the condition that the exposed case was at the ward during this time. The time between when a patient developed illness and was admitted to the hospital can be inferred from 