We estimated the daily effective reproduction number following the likelihood-based approach proposed by Cauchemez et al. 1 , which is an extension of Wallinga and Teunis's method 2 . denotes the number of hand, foot and mouth (HFMD) cases showing symptoms on day and is the number of infectees of the cases. is then calculated as / according to the definition 3 . It is rare to observe directly, though it can be inferred from the observed epidemic curve and the serial interval distribution 2 . By considering the potential transmission networks as described by Wallinga et al. and Cauchemez et al. 1, 2 , the relative probability that cases with illness onset on day have been infected by cases with illness onset on day is
where (. ) is the probability mass function of the serial interval distribution. In theory, a primary case and its infectee can show symptoms on the same day but a case cannot be infected by itself. Therefore, an indicator function 1{} was used to avoid counting the case itself as a potential primary case.
With limited studies on the serial interval of HFMD, we assumed the mean serial interval as 3.7 days (standard deviation 2.6 days) from the only available transmission study of enterovirus 71 in Taiwan 4 . We assumed a Weibull distribution for the serial interval as the distribution is not available from available studies. Different values and distributions of serial interval were used in the sensitivity analysis.
According to a previous study, the case-hospitalization risk (CHR) of HFMD cases in Hong Kong ranged from 0.6% to 2.8% with an average of 1.3% between 2001 and 2009 5 . We therefore assumed the CHR as a constant of 1.3% during our study period. Within the study period, weekly and daily population and were estimated by performing linear interpolation.
The daily incidence was first smoothed to capture the main trend of the reproduction number in Figure 1 . In the main analysis, we derived the weekly cumulative incidence of hospitalizations ( ) up to week t according to the relation:
where is the cumulative sum of weekly count of hospitalization and is the weekly population in week t. Then we used cubic spline interpolation 6 to obtain the cumulative daily incidence of hospitalizations . The daily incidence of hospitalizations on day s was calculated by − −1 .
We derived the average incidence of hospitalizations in week according to the relation:
Cubic smoothing spline interpolation was used to obtain the daily incidence by minimizing the generalized cross validation score. The daily number of HFMD on day s was calculated by = / . 
The expectation and variance of − ( ) therefore can be obtained by the followings:
We assumed ~ ( ), where was given a a vague prior distribution (10 −5 , 10 −5 ). + ( ) will then follow a Negative Binomial distribution:
is the cumulative probability that the generation interval is equal to or shorter than − .
Under the assumption that the has a vague prior, Cauchemez 1 derived an approximation for the expectation and variance of ( ):
Eventually, we obtained daily reproduction number simply according to the relation = / . The weekly reproduction number was calculated as the geometric mean of within the corresponding week. The variance of log ( ) was calculated using the following approximation by delta-method:
where refers to the daily effective reproduction number for day k.
We identified the main epidemic periods for each year starting from the exponential growth phase and ended by the last week of August ( Figure 2 ). The exponential growth phase was defined as the period when the estimated daily number of HFMD kept growing and the growth rate (∆ ) continuously increased for no less than two months at the beginning of an epidemic according to the basic feature of epidemics 7 .
Absolute humidity ( ) reflects the actual content of water vapor in the air at a given temperature and was expressed as 3 ⁄ in the study. We derived daily from relative humidity ( , in percentage) and mean temperature ( , in Celsius) according to the following equation:
where is a consistant of 2.166824 J ⁄ , which is approximately calculated from the molecular weight of water vapor over the gas content of water vapor. ( ) refers to the saturation vapor pressure in given temperature and was calculated as 8 :
Weekly absolute humidity was calculated as the arithmetic mean of daily within the corresponding week.
We used a linear regression model proposed by te Beest et al 9 to explore the correlation between HFMD transmission and potential driving factors. Weekly effective reproduction number reflected HFMD transmissibility which depends on the potential factors including the depletion of susceptibles ( ), absolute humidity ( ) and school vacations ( ). We assumed is a function of the basic reproduction number 0 according to the relation:
where and are the parameters of effects of absolute humidity and school vacations.
After taking the between-year effect into account, the equation of linear regression was derived as 9 :
where is the weekly effective reproduction number in week of year ; 0 is the intercept and equals to log ( 0 0 ) ( 0 refers to the proportion of susceptibles in the beginning of year ); is the coefficients for the yearly depletion of susceptibles, which equals to -/ 0 ( is a constant determined by the cumulative incidence of each year );
is the cumulative incidence of HFMD cases up to week -1 of year (in scale of per 1 million); is the weekly mean absolute humidity; and is a binary variable indicating whether the week is in school vacation or not.
We estimated the autocorrelation and partial autocorrelation of residuals from the fitted regression model without adjusting auto-correlation terms. The residuals from the model show autocorrelation (Supplementary Figure 3) . We therefore fitted a model adding the autoregressive terms of reproduction numbers up to lag 2:
where 1 and 2 are the coefficients for the auto-regressive terms. is assumed to follow a normal distribution. The ACF and PACF plots did not indicate strong autocorrelation and partial autocorrelations after adjustment of autoregressive terms (Supplementary Figure 3) . Results from the models with or without adjusting autocorrelation were very similar (Table 1-3, Supplementary Table 3) , which suggests the autocorrelation in would not affect our main findings.
We included absolute humidity as the meteorological factor in the main analysis. Previous studies reported temperature, relative humidity and air pressure positively correlated with the incidence of HFMD 10-12 . We therefore also included the above variables in the regression model but did not find significant associations with HFMD transmission, except for temperature in one model accounting for the autocorrelation of (results not shown). In fact, absolute humidity is highly correlated with temperature, relative humidity and air pressure (data not shown). We finally chose absolute humidity as it synthesizes all the above meteorological variables and the AIC and BIC scores suggested a good model fitness when including absolute humidity, comparing to model including other meteorological factors.
We conducted a sensitivity analysis by defining other cutoffs for the main epidemic periods at the end of July, September and October respectively, in order to examine their potential impacts on the results. Models adjusting or without adjusting for autocorrelation were also fitted. The relative order of the potential driving factors were the same as our main results and the results did not suggest an association between absolute humidity and , except for the case when the defined epidemic period ended early by the end of July (Table 3 and Supplementary Table   4 ). EV71 activity seems to have no impacts on our main findings.
A sensitivity analysis was also conducted assuming a serial interval with mean 7 days and 2 days respectively with a standard deviation of 2.6 days. Results from the sensitivity analysis indicate that a longer serial interval of HFMD would lead to larger estimated in the growth phase of the spring-summer epidemics (Supplementary Figure 1) . The maximum values of during the exponential growth phase of spring-summer waves were estimated to be 1.17 to 1.26 in the study period. Assuming a mean serial interval of 2 days; while peaked at 1.42 to 1.60 when assuming the mean as 7 days (Supplementary Figure 1) . A longer serial interval led to larger uncertainty in the estimates and slightly shortened the duration with estimated ≥ 1 (Supplementary Figure 1) . We also estimated by assuming a Gamma or Lognormal distribution for the serial interval and found similar results as those assuming a Weibull distribution. Results were similar to our main analysis when were estimated assuming different mean serial intervals.
We also estimated assuming a CHR of 0.6% and 2.8% respectively throughout the study period. Results indicate that the assumption on CHR would not affect the point estimate of and will result in narrower 95% confidence intervals for a lower CHR (Supplementary Figure   2 
Supplementary Table 1 ( 0 ), so there are in total five pairs of coefficients for yearly intercept and yearly depletion of susceptibles [23] . † Variable of cumulative incidence is in scale of 10-6. 