Surveillance for influenza-like illness (ILI) activity in the United States traditionally relies on reports of medically attended visits, including outpatient, and emergency room visits and hospitalizations. 1 The majority of ILI is mild and self-limited, and many patients never seek care in a medical setting. 2 Surveillance for medically attended ILI misses cases of non-medically attended ILI in the community and underestimates the true prevalence of ILI in the population. Understanding community ILI can shed light on the full burden of influenza. Furthermore, primary care clinics, a common setting for outpatient ILI surveillance, may not adequately capture cases who could seek care in other settings, such as emergency departments or urgent care clinics. In addition, systems that focus on medically attended ILI may have other biases (eg, access to care) and delays associated with care seeking that may affect sensitivity of testing and may not reflect influenza and other respiratory virus activity in the broader community. [3] [4] [5] A comparison between community surveillance and outpatient medically attended ILI surveillance systems could help to determine how well medically attended surveillance systems reflect respiratory viral activity in the community.
Community surveillance for ILI in the United States has been performed periodically in several cohort studies in various small geographic areas [6] [7] [8] [9] ; broader scale community surveillance is generally cost prohibitive. The Mobile Surveillance for Acute Respiratory Infections and Influenza-Like Illness in the Community (MoSAIC) Study is one recent prospective household-based cohort study established in 2012, in a neighborhood in New York City to obtain community-level incidence of influenza and other respiratory viruses. 8 In 2009, New York City, along with other participating sites, began the Influenza Incidence Surveillance Project (IISP). IISP is designed to determine the incidence of medically attended ILI and the proportion of ILI attributable to influenza and other respiratory diseases using provider estimates of patient populations. 10 Using these two systems in the single geographic region of New York City, we sought to compare symptoms as well as the frequency, proportion, and seasonal distribution of respiratory pathogens associated with ILI between individuals with medically attended ILI and broader community-level ILI across three influenza seasons to better understand how current ILI surveillance in medical clinics reflects activity seen at the community level.
The MoSAIC study methods have been described previously. 8 Briefly, MoSAIC is a CDC-funded community-based study which performs surveillance for acute respiratory illness (ARI), including influenza-like illness (ILI), in a neighborhood in New York City yearround with the goal to assess ARI and ILI rates and etiology in the community. The cohort consists of approximately 250 households and is a primarily Latino population. Demographic information is collected upon enrollment. Households receive twice-weekly text messages, asking if anyone has runny nose, congestion, sore throat, cough, body aches, or fever and report either "yes" or "no." Home visits are performed by research staff to obtain a nasal swab from any participants meeting the ARI criteria (2 symptoms including fever, runny nose/congestion, sore throat, cough, and/or myalgia) with symptoms lasting < 5 days and who are still symptomatic. The ARI criteria for infants (less than 12 months of age) also include runny nose/congestion alone. Respiratory swabs are analyzed in a research laboratory using a BioFire FilmArray multiplex polymerase chain reaction (PCR) assay (BioFire Diagnostics LLC, Salt Lake City, UT) detecting influenza A virus (H1, H1N1pdm09, and H3), influenza B virus, adenovirus, coronaviruses (229E, HKU1, NL63, and OC43), enteroviruses/rhinoviruses, human metapneumovirus (HMPV), human parainfluenza viruses (HPIV) types 1-4, respiratory syncytial virus (RSV), Chlamydia pneumoniae, Mycoplasma pneumoniae, and Bordetella pertussis. Further information on symptoms and care-seeking behaviors is collected by interview at illness end.
We limited our analysis to episodes meeting ILI criteria (fever with cough or sore throat) for appropriate comparison to ILI within IISP.
The CDC's IISP is a population-based outpatient surveillance network operating year-round, for syndromic ILI with systematic laboratory testing for influenza viruses, including three primary care clinics in New York City. 10 Since 2009, participating clinics report the weekly number of ILI and all-cause visits. Patients with symptom onset within 7 days of presentation are included, and ILI is defined as fever with cough or sore throat among patients ≥ 2 years of age, and fever with ≥1 of cough, sore throat, nasal congestion, or rhinorrhea among children < 2 years 
During the surveillance period, 334 households were followed by While all participants included in this analysis met the case definition of ILI (fever and cough or sore throat), there were significant differences in symptoms reported by participants in MoSAIC as compared with participants in IISP (Table 2) . Differences persisted even after adjusting for age; ILI cases in MoSAIC were more likely to report rhinorrhea (81% vs 62%, P < .01) and less likely to report sore throat (47% vs 61%, P < .01) or myalgia (23% vs 46%, P < .01) compared with those in IISP. To further explore if these difference were due to care-seeking behavior, we examined reported symptoms among only MoSAIC cases that reported seeking care for their illness and found that differences compared with the IISP group persisted ( Table 2 ). Coronavirus 25 (7) 47 ( 10 (7) 1 (1) 16 (10) 11 (4) 14 (10) 6 (4)
Human metapneumovirus 6 (4)
19 (14) 1 (1) 3 (2) 4 (2) 2 (1) 8 (5) 3 (5) Influenza A 52 (35) 6 (4) 42 (34) 32 (19) 78 (31) 18 (13) 57 (39) 13 (20) Influenza B 11 (7) 5 (4) 32 (26) 16 (10) 28 (11) 11 (8) 20 (14) 9 (14) Parainfluenza virus 15 (12) 40 (24) 43 (17) 19 (14) 8 (5) 4 (6) and These two factors may contribute to differences in social mixing within each of the two study groups, despite residing in the same city. While state-to-state variation in influenza activity is seen in the United States in national surveillance data, there have been limited studies on small-scale geographic variations in respiratory pathogen circulation. However, local variation in RSV epidemics and lower respiratory illness clustering have been described previously. [14] [15] [16] A possible disadvantage of community surveillance is that the intensive cohort study used in MoSAIC with in-person specimen collection and monthly home visits would likely be cost prohibitive on a broader scale. Further efforts to reduce costs could include relying on automated text messaging or email with follow-up and self-swabbing, which may allow community surveillance to be used more broadly. 17,18
Our analysis had several limitations. Firstly, we restricted to an ILI definition to focus on influenza, however, may not be optimal for the other viral pathogens tested. Our objective was to compare the pathogens detected within the context of ILI between the two systems rather than the full burden of all pathogens. Data on vaccination were incomplete in both IISP and MoSAIC, limiting our ability to control for vaccination in the analysis. In addition, we did not take possible household clustering into account among MoSAIC participants who were living in the same residence.
Surveillance through community cohorts can more fully capture local incidence and etiology of ILI and has the potential to provide further information beyond what is capable in medically attended surveillance, such as transmissibility 8, [19] [20] [21] and may add to our understanding of the full burden of influenza. While the timing of influenza and other virus detections were captured equally well in community and outpatient surveillance, the proportions of viruses detected varied between the community and outpatient clinics. There may be local geographic and/or social mixing differences affecting incidence of circulating viruses at a very local level and outpatient surveillance across more clinics may better reflect viral circulation in the larger community. Community and medically attended surveillance are valuable and complementary for understanding full ILI incidence, etiology, and burden.