: 17-mer coverage distribution. The distribution was used to estimate the cheetah genome size using the method introduced in [1] . The xaxis is 17-mer coverage depth (that is, occurrence of a 17-mer in the cheetah genome); the y-axis is the percentage of the total number of 17-mers. Figure S2 : Distribution of read depth for the de novo assembled cheetah genome. The x-axis is the number of reads aligned to a genome position (nucleotide); the y-axis is the percentage of such genome positions. The mean read depth value is 73⇥. Figure S3 : GC content and average sequencing depth values for cheetah reads. The assembled cheetah genome was split into non-overlapping windows of 10 kbp. The x-and y-axes represent GC content and average depth values, respectively, for each genome window. The dominant GC content value lies within 35-40%. Also we can see the subgroup (the lower cloud with depth 20-40 and GC 30-50%) of a half depth of the major, which may represent the sex-related chromosome. Figure S4 : The depth distribution of re-sequencing reads for all six cheetahs. The figure is based on short read alignments to de novo assembled cheetah sca↵olds. Observed variants were not filtered by coverage or quality. The total number of raw SNV sites is ⇠ 8 ⇥ 10 6 . Human is on the right side and cheetah on the left. SNV density for human (red) displayed with graphs inside the Circos plot. For two cheetahs populations SNV density displayed with orange (Tanzania) and red (Namibia) graphs. Figure S10 : Comparison of cheetah and dog MHC regions. Dog is on the right side and cheetah on the left. SNV density for dog (red) displayed with graphs inside the Circos plot. For two cheetahs populations SNV density displayed with orange (Tanzania) and red (Namibia) graphs. Figure S11 : Inferred historical population sizes by pairwise sequential Markovian coalescent analysis. The x-axis gives time measured by pairwise sequence divergence and the y-axis gives the e↵ective population size measured by the scaled mutation rate µ. Figure S12 : Bootstrap values for DaDi demographic models. We perform a total of 100 bootstraps to estimate the variance of the log-likelihood by randomly selecting 1 M of cheetah SNVs. Each one were performed four times, using IM, BIM, SBR and ISB models, respectively. The last model (designated as ISB) has the smallest variance and thus is considered the optimal model for cheetah. 