Since we focused on the distribution of outbreaks rather than the total number of cases, we analyzed only the first positive report associated with each outbreak or the first negative report (if all suspected cases from that farm were rabies negative) when multiple animals were reported sick or dead. Information for each outbreak included species infected, date of disease onset, the district where the outbreak occurred (Peru is divided into regions, provinces, districts and towns), and GPS data when available from the farm or community where the outbreak occurred (N = 914 outbreaks). We excluded data from two regions on the coast of Peru (Lima and Ancash) that reported small numbers of unconfirmed outbreaks and 23 outbreaks from the region of Puno, where dog rabies causes most livestock infections [1].
. Results of sensitivity analysis of wavefront speeds to the elevation threshold. The relationship between randomly chosen elevation thresholds and their estimated wave speed (left) and their associated R 2 (right) are shown for Chalhuanca (top plots) and Rio Apurimac (bottom plots).
Vertical lines show the 95% CI of predicted outbreak locations of the test data set (in black points) in Chalhuanca (left) and Rio Apurimac (right). Open points are data used in the training model. Table S1 . Month of predicted VBR arrival to towns ahead of each wave. The date of VBR arrival between 2015 and 2017 was predicted for each town under 3600 meters recorded in the national census. Low and high months of predicted arrival are 95% prediction intervals, estimated from the regression models from Figure 4 using the predict.lm function of R. Predicted arrivals before 2014 in the low confidence interval were assigned to 01/2015. We note that dates of predicted arrival are based on a simple landscape heterogeneity model of least cost paths from the predicted origin below 3600 meters, which could be overestimates if unidentified landscape barriers exist. Our predictions will lose accuracy if the speed of the epizootic changes and later dates should be re-estimated as new data become available. 