Thank you for the submission of your manuscript to EMBO Molecular Medicine. We have now heard back from two of the three referees whom we asked to evaluate your manuscript. As these two referees have very similar recommendations, we decided to go ahead and make a decision now.
that the problem with MABs is lack of complete coverage against the multitude of lyssavirus. The described MABs have very broad neutralizing activity and may therefore allow for their clinical development. The animal model is appropriate.
This manuscript, which in great detail describes the specificity of several MABs that may be suited to replace RIG, is timely and will be an important addition to our published arsenal of rabies biologics. The authors may wish to check the manuscript carefully for language -some of the sentences don't quite adhere to English rules of grammar (e.g., last two sentences of the introduction).
Referee #3 (Remarks):
The manuscript by De Benedictis describes the isolation and characterization of several monoclonal antibodies to lyssaviruses, with potential utility for rabies post-exposure prophylaxis. A total of 500 mAbs were isolated from memory B cells from vaccinees prescreened for anti-RABV activity. From these, two mAbs (RVC20 and RVC58) were shown to neutralize with greater breadth and potency than those mAbs currently under clinical development. This data is supplemented by partial epitope mapping and virological analysis. Finally, the authors show that relatively low doses of a combination of these 2 mAbs protects hamsters from a lethal RABV challenge, and assessed the effect of these mAbs on vaccine responses in hamsters. The potential superiority of these new mAbs over CR57, CR4098 and RAB1 is clearly shown here, providing the basis for future clinical studies. Figure 2 and related text. There are some intriguing findings here. Although the reciprocal competition is very clean for mAbs to antigenic site I, it is more confusing for antigenic sites III and III.2, with mAbs RVB181, RVC56 etc. blocked by antigenic site III antibodies, but unable to block in the opposite assay. The authors speculate that these antibodies form a third cluster that recognizes a distinct site, but I am not sure this accounts for the timing. The opposite is true for RBV686. Are there potential other explanations e.g. conformational changes that could account for this? Figure 3 . the extraordinary breadth of RCV68 (despite low potency) suggests this target should be further investigated as a new conserved target. It would be worth adding this to the discussion. Page 7. Can the authors comment on the discrepancy between neutralization of pseudotyped viruses compared to live viruses by RVC68? Is this simply a general reflection of the reduced potency of the mAb compared to others i.e. is the pseudovirus assay intrinsically more sensitive or does this reflect the use of IC50 versus IC90? Figure 6 . Why is the more detailed analysis (the pie charts) only performed for selected sites? For Ag site 1, only the 2 most polymorphic sites are described, whereas for Ag site II only one site is omitted. Figure 7 . In panel A (the challenge study) the high dose is 0.045, whereas for the vaccine responsiveness experiments in panels B-D, HD is 40mg/kg. I found this confusing and would more clearly label the axes in B-D.
Page 12. Can the authors comment on the observation that in the presence of the HD of mAbs, the binding responses are significantly lower, but neutralizing responses unaffected.
The discussion is weak. While it is important to place these data in the context of PEP, there are many other aspects (more scientific) that are not discussed at all e.g. potential new epitopes. A more thoughtful discussion would substantially strengthen this paper.
Minor: Page 4, last line of intro -incomplete sentence Page 7 -last paragraph. It does not appear to me that CR57 has a greater range of IC50/90 values than RVC20, though undoubtedly it is less potent Figure 5B is extremely hard to follow -the addition of a schematic showing how the chimeras are constructed might be useful to clarify this. We thank the reviewer for the positive comments on our study. The discrepancy in neutralisation observed between live virus and pseudotyped virus assays is likely due to more than one reason. Firstly, the density of the G protein on the surface of these viruses may differ. Data from previous studies that isolated potent and broadly neutralising influenza mAbs We thank the Referee for the careful review and we agree that it would be more appropriate to show the complete analysis on all positions where the degree of conservation is not equivalent to 100%.
We have therefore changed We thank the Referee for the careful review. As suggested we have labeled the axes of panels B, C and D of Figure 7 accordingly. The amount of monoclonals (in mg/kg) used in each experimental group has been therefore indicated in parentheses.
Similarly to the work by Goudsmith et at (2006) for the CR4098+CR57 cocktail, we also assessed the neutralizing titres detectable more than 40 days following PEP, including the administration of vaccine and the RVC20+RVC58 antibody mixture. Of note, we have further assessed whether the peripheral neutralizing titers conferring protection to hamsters may be due to either hamster endogenous post-vaccination immune response, to exogenous human antibodies due to passive immunization or by a mixture of them. We found that viral neutralization was mainly due to hamster endogenous response when HRIG or RVC20+RVC58 (0.045mg/kg) was administered, and that our cocktail had almost been fully cleared by the organism about 40 days after administration. As for the RVC20+RVC58 (40 mg/kg) antibody mixture (dubbed HD in the previous version), although the endogenous response elicited (as detected by ELISA by measuring the levels of hamster antibodies directed against the RABV G protein) indicated that an interference between the passively administered monoclonal antibodies and vaccine had somehow occurred, hamsters still had a high neutralizing titre in peripheral blood over 40 days post administration and were therefore still potentially protected against a lethal RABV challenge. These findings merit further investigations, as it has the potential to break the paradigm on which post-exposure prophylaxis approaches are based. Authors acknowledge that this important finding was not discussed in the previous version of the manuscript and for this reason a specific comment has been now added in the discussion section (page 13, lines 10-27).
The discussion is weak. While it is important to place these data in the context of PEP, there are many other aspects (more scientific) that are not discussed at all e.g. potential new epitopes. A more thoughtful discussion would substantially strengthen this paper.
Authors acknowledge that other aspects of the study were not discussed in the previous version of the manuscript; this is why the discussion section has been strengthened with a paragraph underlining some of the most important aspects:
(i) the potential for discovering new epitopes (i.e. that recognized by RVC68), and the relevance of identifying antigenic sites that are conserved among different lyssaviruses (pages 12, lines 6-17);
(ii) a possible explanation of unexpected pattern of previously characterized ASIII antibodies and, more generally, of ASIII antibodies as characterized in the present study (page 6, lines 13-19).
Thanks for the careful review. We have completed the sentence "the combination of two antibodies specific for distinct antigenic sites on the G protein and able to broadly neutralize both RABV and non-RABV lyssaviruses…" that is now replaced with "the combination of two antibodies that bind to different antigenic sites on the RABV G protein and are able to broadly neutralize both RABV and non-RABV lyssavirus isolates, will significantly reduce the risk of PEP failure." (page 4, lines 27-29).
Page 7 -last paragraph. It does not appear to me that CR57 has a greater range of IC50/90 values than RVC20, though undoubtedly it is less potent.
We agree with the Referee's comment and have changed the text accordingly by restricting the comment about the broader range of IC50s to the comparison between RVC58 vs RAB1 and CR4098. This sentence has been rewritten (page 8, lines 7-8) as follows: "CR4098 and RAB1
showed a broader range of IC50/IC90 values (0.7-23600 ng/ml, 1-4153 ng/ml, respectively), neutralizing six and three RABV isolates, respectively, with IC50 >1000 ng/ml, a concentration which is likely not to be effective in PEP." Figure 5B is extremely hard to follow -the addition of a schematic showing how the chimeras are constructed might be useful to clarify this.
We agree with Referee's comment and acknowledge him for the suggestion to include a diagrammatic sketch showing how the chimeras were constructed. We have therefore included a schematic showing generation of epitope swapped G protein in the new Figure EV1 . Do the data meet the assumptions of the tests (e.g., normal distribution)? Describe any methods used to assess it.
Is there an estimate of variation within each group of data?
Is the variance similar between the groups that are being statistically compared? Manuscript Number:
This checklist is used to ensure good reporting standards and to improve the reproducibility of published results. These guidelines are consistent with the Principles and Guidelines for Reporting Preclinical Research issued by the NIH in 2014. Please follow the journal's authorship guidelines in preparing your manuscript.
Please fill out these boxes  (Do not worry if you cannot see all your text once you press return) a specification of the experimental system investigated (eg cell line, species name).
Each figure caption should contain the following information, for each panel where they are relevant:
The data shown in figures should satisfy the following conditions:
Source Data should be included to report the data underlying graphs. Please follow the guidelines set out in the author ship guidelines on Data Presentation. a statement of how many times the experiment shown was independently replicated in the laboratory.
Any descriptions too long for the figure legend should be included in the methods section and/or with the source data.
Please ensure that the answers to the following questions are reported in the manuscript itself. We encourage you to include a specific subsection in the methods section for statistics, reagents, animal models and human subjects.
In the pink boxes below, provide the page number(s) of the manuscript draft or figure legend(s) where the information can be located. Every question should be answered. If the question is not relevant to your research, please write NA (non applicable).
the assay(s) and method(s) used to carry out the reported observations and measurements an explicit mention of the biological and chemical entity(ies) that are being measured. an explicit mention of the biological and chemical entity(ies) that are altered/varied/perturbed in a controlled manner. the exact sample size (n) for each experimental group/condition, given as a number, not a range; a description of the sample collection allowing the reader to understand whether the samples represent technical or biological replicates (including how many animals, litters, cultures, etc.).
the data were obtained and processed according to the field's best practice and are presented to reflect the results of the experiments in an accurate and unbiased manner. figure panels include only data points, measurements or observations that can be compared to each other in a scientifically meaningful way. graphs include clearly labeled error bars for independent experiments and sample sizes. Unless justified, error bars should not be shown for technical replicates. if n< 5, the individual data points from each experiment should be plotted and any statistical test employed should be justified
The number of individuals in each experimental group (n=12 per group) was calculated using the Fisher's exact conditional test for two proportions (as implemented by Proc Power twosamplefreq, SAS software) and power 1--β=0.80 (α=0.05).
No samples nor animals were excluded from the analysis.
Animals were randomly assigned to tretement or control groups.
Not applicable.
In order to minimise the effect of subjective bias during allocation, animals were randomly assigned to tretement or control groups. No blinding of investigator was implemented. Yes, there is. The variation within each group has been shown in the figures.
Yes, it is.