is a bracket graph developed by Hofacker et al. [1] , where the bracket is matched by an equal and opposite bracket on the 3' side. Figure S2d There are many examples of symmetric I-loops found in RNA structure databases. Some asymmetric I-loops ( n ) can also be found.
))).))))
((((....(((((....)))))))))
g h e f 5' 3'
3' ((((.....) )))..(((((.....))))).)))). (4) For pseudoknots: parts of the structure still satisfy cases 1 through 3.
However, in addition, in at least one part of a region between and l such that , there exists some base pairs that satisfy either or k , , ', '
Hence, many more possibilities can be generated once we start allowing pseudoknots.
Pseudoknots differ from real knots in the sense that the strand does not pass completely through the loop but only becomes potentially entangled with it. Anyone who has tried to untangle a pair of earphones or tried to untangle a recently, neatly wound up cord can realize that knots naturally occur on long flexible cords. Indeed, great effort seems to be required to avoid tangling a heap of cords. Figure S5a shows a common pseudoknot known as an H-type pseudoknot. This is also known as an ABAB pseudoknot. The structure is notated below with the standard parenthesis notation for the basic secondary structure (here shown in blue) and square brackets for the pseudoknot linkage (here shown in red). Green indicates the regions of free strand that are not forming base pairs (bps).
The color distinction of the stems in this example is not important because both stems are the same length and both stems are less than 10 bps. [[[[[[[[[[.) ))))))))))))) . [.) ))))))))))))) . and also known as an ABACBC pseudoknot. (f) The structure shown in bracket notation. (g) A pseudoknot. The difference between (c) and (g) is that the linkage stem is shorter than 9 contiguous bps. (h) The same structure in bracket notation. Figure S5c shows a knot and the corresponding bracket structure is shown below in Fig. S5d .
Both stems in Fig. S5c contain 14 base pairs (bp). Since the helical axis makes a rotation of 360 o every 10 bps, this means that the structure in Fig. S5c is tangled in a knot. There is no reason why such a structure cannot form. Indeed, knots are known to form in some rare proteins [2, 3] . However, it is not a pseudoknot and the current approach is not designed to estimate its existence or the likelihood of its formation. One important feature of a pseudoknot is, therefore, that the linkage stem (here shown in red) must be shorter than 10 contiguous bps. Figure S5e shows two stem-hairpins-loops (blue and purple) that are joined by a linkage stem (red). The stems are all short as in Fig. S5a . This is a pseudoknot, sometimes referred to as a kissing loop. It is also known as an ABACBC pseudoknot. It is also observed in a number of places, although less frequently than H-type pseudoknots. The corresponding bracket notation for this structure is shown below (Fig. S5f) . Belvedere knot secondary structure Supplement Figure S6 . A special type of knot (right hand side) that becomes entangled due to the way the structure folds up. The two dimensional nature of the RNA schematics tends to hide curious possibilities as this. The knot is seen in equilibrium between the unknotted structure (left hand side) and the "Belvedere knot" (right hand side).
Functional RNA structures that contain knots of the form shown in Figs. S5c or S6 are currently unknown or have not been reported. However, pseudoknots are often observed in functional RNA structures, particularly H-type pseudoknots (Fig. S5a) . Single strand RNA sequences such as messenger RNA with introns can have sequences with lengths that number in the tens of thousands of nucleotides. With such a propensity for a few simple cords to become tangled, and, since the cell can have many thousands of protein and RNA strands present within the cellular environment, this suggests that there is a fair amount of effort made within the cell to prevent or get rid of knots [2] .
In this work, we are concerned with the prediction of pseudoknots. These structures have the property that they can be evaluated as structures resulting from reversible folding.