Pro or Ala at the P1 position. The substrate recognition mechanism has been fully elucidated for mammalian DPP IV by crystal structure analyses but not for bacterial orthologues. Here, we report the crystal structures of a bacterial DPP IV (PmDAP IV) in its free form and in complexes with two kinds of dipeptides as well as with a non-peptidyl inhibitor at 1.90 to 2.47 Å resolution. Acyl-enzyme intermediates were observed for the dipeptide complexes of PmDAP IV, whereas tetrahedral intermediates were reported for the oligopeptide complexes of mammalian DPP IVs. This variation reflects the different structural environments of the active site Arg residues, which are involved in the recognition of a substrate carbonyl group, of mammalian and bacterial enzymes. A phylogenetic analysis revealed that PmDAP IV is a closer relative of dipeptidyl peptidases 8 and 9 (DPP8 and DPP9, DPP IV-family enzymes) than DPP IV. These results provide new insights into the substrate recognition mechanism of bacterial DAP IVs and may assist in the development of selective inhibitors for DAP IVs from pathogenic asaccharolytic bacteria, which utilise proteins or peptides as an energy source.
Overall structure of PmDAP IV. The PmDAP IV enzyme forms a homodimer, with each subunit consisting of 724 residues (Ala22-Pro745) and a molecular weight of approximately 160 kDa (Fig. 1A) . The N-terminal region of PmDAP IV has a typical signal sequence of gram-negative bacteria and hence PmDAP IV exists as a soluble form in the periplasm 11 , while the mammalian DPP IV and FAP are type II transmembrane proteins 25 . The crystal structures of PmDAP IV in the ligand-free form and in complexes with dipeptides (Lys-Pro or Ile-Pro) and a non-peptidyl inhibitor (Inhibitor-1c) were determined at resolutions of 2.47, 1.90, 2.44 and 2.13 Å, respectively (Tables 1 and 2 ). Representative electron density maps of the bound peptides and inhibitor are shown in Figure S1 . The electron densities of the P2 side chains (Lys and Ile) are poorer than the P1-Pro residue covalently attached to the Oγ atom of Ser613 (Figures S1A and S1C). These are consistent with the results of refinement that the temperature factors of the bound ligand atoms are higher for some flexible groups away from the acyl-intermediate bond. This is also true for the inhibitor complex ( Figure S1D ). In the present crystal structure analysis of the ligand-free PmDAP IV, the asymmetric unit comprises two dimers of PmDAP IV. Dimerisation is also observed in the crystal structure of mammalian DPP IVs [31] [32] [33] [34] . The protruding anti-parallel β-sheet dimerisation interface reported for mammalian DPP IVs is also observed for PmDAP IV. This type of inter-subunit interaction has been found among several crystal forms of PmDAP IV (Table 1) , indicating that such dimer formation is the natural state of PmDAP IV. The protomer of PmDAP IV consists of two domains separated by a deep cleft (Fig. 1B) . One domain, containing the α/β hydrolase fold harbouring the Asp-His-Ser catalytic triad, is responsible for catalysis; the second, β-propeller domain is the regulatory domain that is necessary for exopeptidase activity. A topology diagram of the PmDAP IV protomer is shown in Figure S2 .
Catalytic domain. The catalytic domain includes residues 22-33 and 474-745, and forms an α/β hydrolase fold comprising a central eight-stranded β-sheet sandwiched by thirteen α-helices. The α/β hydrolase fold is characteristic of clan SC peptidases 2 , such as prolyl oligopeptidase (S9 family), carboxypeptidase Y (S10 family), Xaa-Pro dipeptidyl peptidase (S15 family), Pro-Xaa carboxypeptidase (S28 family), and prolyl aminopeptidase (S33 family). The catalytic domain of human DPP IV can be superimposed onto that of PmDAP IV (Fig. 2) . The serine peptidase catalytic triads 41 , His721, Asp689 and Ser613 in PmDAP IV and His740, Asp708 and Ser630 in human DPP IV, are almost completely superimposable, with a root mean square (rms) deviation between the two structures of 0.95 Å for 212 structurally equivalent Cα atoms, which had 31% sequence identity for that region. Similarly, the rms deviation between the catalytic domains of PmDAP IV and SmDAP IV is 0.60 Å for 264 structurally equivalent Cα atoms, which had 77% sequence identity for that region.
The β-propeller domain. The β-propeller domain forms a funnel-shaped structure comprising eight blades, each of which comprises four anti-parallel β-strands, except for blade 4 (Figs 3 and S2 ), which contains two additional components. One is a short helix between the first and second strands of blade 4. This helix Figure 1 . Three-dimensional structure of PmDAP IV. The catalytic domain is coloured in magenta. The β-propeller domain is coloured from purple (blade-1) to red (blade-8). A long insertion containing Arg106 located between blade-1 and blade-2, which was disordered in the ligand-free form, is shown in gold. (A) Dimeric structure of PmDAP IV. (B) PmDAP IV subunit. The catalytic triad "Ser613, Asp689, and His721", the double-Glu motif "Glu208-Glu209", Arg106 located between blade-1 and blade-2, a bound inhibitor molecule, and blades 1 to 4 are labelled.
Scientific REPORTS | (2018) 8:2714 | DOI: 10 .1038/s41598-018-21056-y contains a double-Glu motif, Glu208-Glu209, which forms salt bridges to the N-terminus of a peptide substrate (Fig. 3A) . The other additional component in blade 4 is a protruding anti-parallel β-sheet between the second and third strands of blade 4 ( Figure S2 ). The anti-parallel β-sheet acts as a dimerisation interface (Fig. 1A) . A hairpin loop between the second and third strands of blade 2 containing Arg125 in human DPP IV, which can interact with the carbonyl group of a substrate peptide 33, 34 , is replaced by a short turn in PmDAP IV (Fig. 3B) . Interestingly, however, the side chain of Arg106 (located between blades 1 and 2 in PmDAP IV), which was disordered in the ligand-free form but was well defined in the peptide/inhibitor complexes (described later), appears to play a role equivalent to that of Arg125 in human DPP IV (Fig. 3C ). Inter-domain contacts between the catalytic and β-propeller domains are observed for blades 4 to 8 of the β-propeller domain and the catalytic domain. Blades 1 to 3 of the β-propeller domain have less contact with the catalytic domain (Fig. 1B) and appear to be more flexible than blades 4 to 8. The rms deviation between the β-propeller domains of PmDAP IV and human DPP IV is 1.19 Å for 151 structurally equivalent Cα atoms, which had 19% sequence identity for that region, and the rms deviation between the β-propeller domains of PmDAP IV and SmDAP IV is 0.82 Å for 333 structurally equivalent Cα atoms, which had 73% sequence identity for that region. Thus, the structures of the β-propeller domains of PmDAP IV and SmDAP IV are somewhat different from that of the human enzyme.
Conformational difference between the ligand-free and dipeptide/inhibitor-bound forms. A comparison of the crystal structure of the ligand-free PmDAP IV with those of dipeptide/inhibitor-bound forms of PmDAP IV showed that the large cleft between the catalytic and β-propeller domains was relatively closed for the peptide/inhibitor-bound forms (Fig. 4) . Larger conformational differences were observed mainly for blades 1 and 2 and the β-hairpin region of a protruding anti-parallel β-sheet between the second and third strands of blade 4. The closed conformation was observed for all crystallographically independent subunits of the dipeptide/ inhibitor-bound complex crystals, in which the asymmetric units of the dipeptide and inhibitor complex crystals contain two and one dimer(s) of PmDAP IV, respectively (Table 1) . Furthermore, the disordered loop region in the ligand-free form (residues 90-109 containing Arg106; Fig. 4 ) was well defined and formed a short helix in the dipeptide/inhibitor-bound complexes ( Figure S3 ). Interestingly, one of the four subunits in the asymmetric unit of the ligand-free form exhibited a relatively closed form, similar to those observed for the dipeptide/ inhibitor-bound forms, and the disordered loop region (residues 90-109) was well defined. IV with the tripeptide Lys-Pro-Tyr. Clear continuous electron density was observed for the first two residues of the tripeptide ( Figure S1A ), and no clear electron density was observed for the last residue, Tyr. Because the PmDAP IV enzyme reaction occurs in the solution used for crystallisation, the Lys-Pro-Tyr tripeptide acts as the substrate, and the reaction products are the N-terminal Lys-Pro (P2-P1) and the C-terminal Tyr (P1′). While the N-terminal product Lys-Pro remains at the active site, the C-terminal product Tyr dissociates from the active site. Interestingly, we observed that the tripeptide was cleaved but remained trapped as an acyl-enzyme intermediate. dipeptide and the Oγ atom of Ser613 were omitted from the model, and the structure was refined. The resultant omit electron density maps showed continuous electron density between the Oγ atom of Ser613 and the carbonyl carbon of the scissile bond ( Figure S1A ). The asymmetric unit was composed of four independent PmDAP IV subunits; in three of the four subunits, the dipeptides were trapped as the acyl-enzyme intermediate, and in the remaining subunit, the hydrolysed dipeptide product (NH 2 -Lys-Pro-COOH) was observed ( Figure S1B ). Similarly, co-crystallisation of PmDAP IV with the tripeptide Ile-Pro-Ile, a well-known peptidyl DPP IV inhibitor, diprotin A 42,43 , resulted in the dipeptide Ile-Pro complex being trapped as an acyl-enzyme intermediate ( Figure S1C ). In the Ile-Pro complex, acyl-enzyme intermediates were observed for all four subunits in the asymmetric unit.
Dipeptide complex. The dipeptide (Lys-Pro or Ile-Pro) complex structures clearly show the molecular basis for the peptide recognition mechanism of PmDAP IV. For simplicity, the following description refers primarily to subunit A of the 1.90-Å-resolution structure of the Lys-Pro complex of PmDAP IV. The bound dipeptide was found in the inter-domain cleft (Fig. 5A ). PmDAP IV hydrolyses peptides from the N-terminus of oligopeptides, cleaving dipeptide units (NH 2 -P2-P1-COOH) when the second P1 residue is Pro or Ala. To act as dipeptidyl aminopeptidase, PmDAP IV must fix the N-terminus of the substrate peptide in position. This task is performed primarily by the side chains of a double-Glu motif (Glu208-Glu209), which forms part of a short helix between the first and second strands of blade 4 of the β-propeller domain. The double-Glu motif forms salt bridges to the N-terminus of the bound dipeptide. In addition, the side chain of Arg106, which is located between blades 1 and 2 of the β-propeller domain, forms a hydrogen bond with the carbonyl group of the P2 residue and also forms a salt bridge with the side chain of Glu208. The side chain of Asn691 also forms a hydrogen bond with the carbonyl group of the P2 residue. In the ligand-free form of PmDAP IV, residues 90-109, which are located between blades 1 and 2 of the β-propeller domain, were disordered. The corresponding region in SmDAP IV is also disordered 37 .
In the dipeptide complex of PmDAP IV, the electron density of residues 90-109 was well defined and was interpreted as a short helix ( Figure S3 ). The P1 Pro residue is accommodated in the S1 pocket, which comprises the side chains of Asn614, Val639, Trp642, Tyr645, Tyr649 and Val692. The side chain of the P2 Lys residue has less interaction with PmDAP IV and is surrounded by water molecules in the active site cleft. The carbonyl oxygen of the P1 residue is accommodated in the oxyanion hole and stabilised by hydrogen bonds with the main-chain imino group of Asn614 and the side-chain OH group of Tyr527. Similarly, an important role of the oxyanion hole (comprising the main-chain NH of Tyr631 and the side-chain OH of Tyr547) in the catalytic mechanism of human DPP IV has been reported 44 .
Inhibitor complex. In addition to the dipeptide complex described above, a non-peptidyl inhibitor complex also shows the structural feature of the active site of PmDAP IV (Fig. 5B ). The inhibitor used in this study is "Inhibitor-1c", 1-({[1-(hydroxymethyl)cyclopentyl]amino}-acetyl)pyrrolidine-2,5-cis-dicarbonitrile, which is known to be an achiral inhibitor of mammalian DPP IV 45 and is commercially available as a hydrochloride salt ( Figure S4 ). The unbiased omit electron density map ( Figure S1D ) suggested that one nitrile group of the inhibitor is attacked by Ser613 to form a covalent bond. A similar covalent bond is also reported for the crystal structure analysis of human DPP IV in a complex with Inhibitor-1c, and imidate formation is confirmed by 13 C-NMR 45 .
The triple bond moiety of the other nitrile group stacks with the side chain of Tyr649. The pyrrolidine ring is accommodated in the S1 pocket (Asn614, Val639, Trp642, Tyr645, Tyr649 and Val692). The inhibitor moiety corresponding to a peptide P2 backbone is recognised by interactions from the side chains of Glu208 and Glu209 to the secondary amine group and from the side chains of Arg106 and Asn691 to the carbonyl group. The cyclopentane ring of the inhibitor has less contact with the active site, and this finding is consistent with the poorer electron density observed for the cyclopentane moiety compared with the pyrrolidine ring moiety ( Figure S1D ).
PmDAP IV, we replaced the arginine residue with alanine or lysine and tested the enzymatic activity of the mutant proteins on a synthetic substrate, Gly-Pro-MCA (Table 3 ). The mutation of Arg106 to Ala resulted in a significant loss of activity (approximately 14% of the wild-type enzyme activity). This result indicates that Arg106 in PmDAP IV plays an important role in the recognition of the substrate peptide. Interestingly, the mutation of Arg106 to Lys also resulted in moderately decreased activities against the synthetic substrate (approximately 37% of the wild-type enzyme activity). These results indicate that both the positive charge and the strict binding mode provided by the side chain at position 106 are essential for the interaction with the carbonyl group of the substrate peptide and with the side chain of Glu208, as observed in the wild-type enzyme (Figs 3C and 5A).
Inhibitor sensitivities of PmDAP IV. To examine whether there is a significant difference in substrate recognition mechanism between PmDAP IV and mammalian DPP IV, the inhibitory activities of DPP IV inhibitors, (Table 4 ). Gliptins have been categorised into three classes according to their binding subsites 46 . Class 1 gliptins bind only to S1 and S2 subsites; class 2 bind only to S2, S1, S1′ and S2′ subsites; and class 3 bind only to S2, S1 and S2-extensive subsites.
Our results showed that class 2 gliptins (linagliptin and trelagliptin) have significantly weaker inhibitory activities against PmDAP IV than do class 1 and 3 gliptins (Table 4 ). In contrast, class 2 gliptins have inhibitory activities against human DPP IV that are comparable to or stronger than class 1 and 3 gliptins.
In this study, we solved the crystal structures of a bacterial DPP IV, PmDAP IV, which specifically recognises a Pro/Ala residue at the P1 position of a substrate peptide. To better understand the substrate recognition mechanism of bacterial DAP IVs, we solved the structures of PmDAP IV in the presence of a peptide or an inhibitor. In the peptide complexes, the double-Glu motif, Glu208-Glu209, forms salt bridges to the N-terminus of the bound dipeptide. This interaction is essential for the exopeptidase activity of PmDAP IV. Interestingly, FAP has both dipeptidyl peptidase activity and endopeptidase activity 25, 36 . Crystal structure of human FAP revealed one major difference in the vicinity of the double-Glu motif (Glu203-Glu204 for FAP) within the active site of the enzyme. Ala657 in FAP, instead of Asp663 as in human DPP IV, reduces the acidity in the N-terminus binding pocket, and this change could explain the lower affinity for N-terminal amines and endopeptidase activity of FAP 36 . For PmDAP IV, corresponding residue is Asp646 (Fig. 5) , and this is consistent with our biochemical data that PmDAP IV has no endopeptidase activity 7 . The complex structures of PmDAP IV also revealed that the side chain of Arg106, which is located between blades 1 and 2 of the β-propeller domain, forms a hydrogen bond with the carbonyl group of the P2 residue of a substrate peptide and forms a salt bridge with the side chain of Glu208. In the ligand-free form of PmDAP IV and that of SmDAP IV 37 , a loop between blades 1 and 2 of the β-propeller domain, containing Arg106 in PmDAP IV, was disordered. The disordered loop region in the ligand-free form (residues 90-109 containing Arg106; Fig. 4 ) was well defined and formed a short helix in the dipeptide/inhibitor-bound complexes. The corresponding region in mammalian DPP IVs is replaced by a short turn and is not involved in substrate recognition. Site-directed mutagenesis studies of Arg106 in PmDAP IV (Table 3) indicated that the Arg side chain is essential for substrate recognition and for fixing the side chain of Glu208, one of the side chains in the double-Glu motif. Residues between blades 1 and 2 of the β-propeller domain, containing Arg106 in PmDAP IV, are highly conserved in SmDAP IV ( Figure S6 ). In contrast, the region of Arg125 in human DPP IV is conserved in P. gingivalis DPP IV ( Figure S6 ). Thus, DPP IVs can be categorised into two groups: human DPP IV-type DPP IVs and SmDAP IV-type DAP IVs. A phylogenetic analysis of several DPP IVs supports this notion ( Figure S7 ). As shown in Figure S7 , PmDAP IV and SmDAP IV belong to the same cluster, whereas PgDPP IV belongs to a bacterial cluster that is distinct from the SmDAP IV-type cluster but is related to a vertebrate DPP IV cluster. Interestingly, the phylogenetic analysis revealed that human dipeptidyl peptidase 8 (DPP8) and human dipeptidyl peptidase 9 (DPP9), which are ubiquitously expressed soluble DPP IV-like enzymes 25 (Fig. 6 ). It is clear that the region of Arg106 in PmDAP IV is conserved in human DPP8 and human DPP9, whereas the region of Arg125 in human DPP IV is conserved in human FAP. Thus, it may be said that PmDAP IV is a bacterial DPP8/ DPP9, though the Arg125-type DAP IV has not yet been identified in P. mexicana. Another interesting structural difference between human DPP IV and PmDAP IV is that human DPP IV has prominent exposed loops in the β-propeller domain than does PmDAP IV (Fig. 3) . In particular, insertions Ala291-Met293 (between blade-4 and blade-5) and Val341-Ala342 (the fourth strand of blade-5) specifically found in human DPP IV (Figs 3 and S6) are involved in interactions with other proteins, such as adenosine deaminase 47 and bat coronavirus HKU4 receptor-binding domain 48 . The catalytic mechanism of serine peptidases involves two tetrahedral intermediates 49 . Figure 7 shows a possible catalytic mechanism of PmDAP IV, essentially identical to that of DPP IV 44 except for the role of arginine side chain described later. The oxyanion-containing tetrahedral intermediate (Fig. 7 , stages (4) and (7)) is stabilised by the backbone NH group of Asn614 and the side-chain OH group of Tyr527, which generate a positively charged pocket known as the oxyanion hole 44, 50, 51 . In the present crystal structure analyses, an acyl-enzyme intermediate (Fig. 7 , stage (6)) is obtained by co-crystallisation of PmDAP IV with the tripeptide Lys-Pro-Tyr, and the N-terminal product, Lys-Pro, remains at the active site, where it is stabilised by salt bridges to the double-Glu motif Glu208-Glu209; finally, the C-terminal product, Tyr, dissociates from the active site. The hydrolysed dipeptide product NH 2 -Lys-Pro-COOH (Fig. 7 , stage (8)) was also observed ( Figure S1B ). As can be seen from Figure 5A , the active site of acyl-intermediate complex of PmDAP IV has enough space near His721 to accommodate the nucleophilic water, although it could not be identified in the present crystal structure analyses. Interestingly, a similar acyl-enzyme intermediate is observed for PmDAP IV co-crystallised with the tripeptide, Ile-Pro-Ile, a well-known peptidyl DPP IV inhibitor, diprotin A 42,43 , resulting in a dipeptide Ile-Pro complex ( Figure S1C ).
In the complex of human DPP IV with the inhibitor diprotin A, a tetrahedral intermediate (Fig. 7 , stage (4)), rather than an acyl-enzyme intermediate, was observed 34 . The bound diprotin A molecule is stabilised by hydrophobic interactions and a large network of salt bridges and hydrogen bonds. The N-terminus of the tripeptide interacts with the double-Glu motif (Glu205-Glu206), and the C-terminus interacts with Arg125 in human DPP IV. Notably, a non-covalent diprotin A complex has also been reported for human DPP IV 52 . In that case, Arg125 interacts with the carbonyl oxygen of the P1′-Ile residue and is responsible for fixing the conformation of the diprotin A molecule. Thus, the role of Arg125 is consistent in the covalent 34 and the non-covalent 52 diprotin A complexes in human DPP IV. A similar tetrahedral intermediate was reported for human DPP IV when complexed with the deca-peptide tNPY 39 . In the tNPY complex, a similar network of salt bridges and hydrogen bonds is observed. The carbonyl group of the third residue (P1′-residue) is stabilised by Arg125. Such an Arg-O = C interaction is present only for tripeptides or longer peptides and would prevent the release of leaving residues (P1′-P2′-) by stabilising the observed tetrahedral intermediate. In tripeptides or longer peptides, the negatively charged P1′ carboxylate (or carbonyl) group electrostatically stabilises the positively charged catalytic His740, thereby preventing transfer of its proton to the nitrogen atom on the released group (the N-terminus of the P1′ residue). Consequently, the C(P1)-N(P1′) bond cannot be cleaved, and the P1′ residue cannot leave from the active site of mammalian DPP IV 40 .
Interestingly, a structurally similar arginine residue, Arg106 in PmDAP IV, interacts with the carbonyl group of the P2 residue of the bound peptide. Therefore, Arg106 plays a role in stabilising the acyl-enzyme intermediate (Fig. 7, stage (6) ), as observed in this study, rather than stabilizing the tetrahedral intermediate (Fig. 7 , stage (4)), as observed for human DPP IV complexes 34, 39, 40 . To examine whether Arg106 in PmDAP IV is involved in recognition of the P1′-residue, we tested the inhibitory activity of diprotin A against the enzymatic activity of PmDAP IV ( Table 5 ). The results showed that diprotin A is a good inhibitor of PmDAP IV. The comparable or stronger inhibitory activity of diprotin A against PmDAP IV, compared with that against human DPP IV (Table 5 ), indicates that the poorer interaction of the P1′ residue of diprotin A with PmDAP IV does not affect the inhibitory activity of diprotin A. Thus, the crystallographically observed covalently bonded interactions, the acyl-enzyme intermediate observed for PmDAP IV co-crystallised with diprotin A in this study ( Figure S1C ) and the tetrahedral intermediates observed for mammalian DPP IVs co-crystallised with diprotin A 34,39 are essential structural factors related to the inhibitory activity of diprotin A.
There are two possible routes to the active site of DPP IVs: the tunnel of the β-propeller domain and a side opening between the catalytic and β-propeller domains. For mammalian DPP IVs, it was proposed that the tunnel of the β-propeller and the side opening, respectively, provide substrate access to and product release from the active site of DPP IV 31 . However, crystal structure analyses of human DPP IV complexed with a decapeptide 39 or a nonapeptide 53 suggested that the side opening is the entrance to the active site because the bound peptides are oriented with the N-terminus facing the active site and with the C-terminus facing the side opening. MD simulations demonstrated that the side opening is more likely to be the pathway of product release than the β-propeller tunnel based on quantitative comparisons of force and work together with potentials of mean force between the two routes 54 . Thus, the side-in and side-out model is more plausible than the propeller-in and side-out model for mammalian DPP IVs.
In this crystal structure analysis of PmDAP IV, conformational differences were observed between the dipeptide-and an inhibitor-bound forms compared with the ligand-free form (Fig. 4) . These observations are clearly different from the crystal structure analyses of mammalian DPP IVs, in which large-scale conformational differences have not yet been reported. It should be noted that an open form of a microbial prolyl oligopeptidase (POP), which shares a certain sequence homology to DPP IV, was reported 55 , such that large substrates could enter through the side opening. However, it is thought that POPs do not possess a DPP IV-equivalent side opening; thus, their internal cavity seems to be accessible only via the β-propeller tunnel 56 . The structures obtained here provide insights into the possible routes for substrate binding and product release for PmDAP IV. Regarding substrate access, the route from the tunnel of the β-propeller is unlikely. For the substrate to access the active site from the β-propeller tunnel, the peptide must adopt an energetically unfavourable, umbrella handle-shaped conformation, with the N-terminus facing the tip of the handle (towards the double-Glu motif) and with the C-terminus facing the body of the handle (in the tunnel) (Fig. 1B) . In contrast, the access route from the side opening provides no impediment. For product release, egress from the side opening appears easy, but we cannot exclude the β-propeller tunnel route. In the dipeptide-or inhibitor-bound forms of PmDAP IV, the inter-domain cleft of PmDAP IV is relatively closed, and the bound peptide/inhibitor is buried in the active site and is not exposed to the solvent (Figs 1B and 5) . The reaction product cannot exit from the active site without a closed-to-open conformational change. Thus, the product may exit from the active site (i) via the β-propeller tunnel without such a conformational change or (ii) via the side opening after such a conformational change. Finally, although the side-in and side-out model is highly possible, the side-in and propeller-out model cannot be excluded for bacterial DAP IVs. Notably, one of the four subunits (molecule B) in the asymmetric unit of the ligand-free crystal of PmDAP IV showed a relatively closed conformation, as observed for the dipeptide/ inhibitor-bound complexes. The rms deviation between the molecule B of the ligand-free PmDAP IV and the molecule A of the Lys-Pro complex of PmDAP IV is 0.40 Å for all 724 Cα atoms. The disordered loop region in the molecules A, C and D of the ligand-free form (residues 90-109 containing Arg106) was well defined in the molecule B and the residues 96-105 formed a short helix as observed in the dipeptide/inhibitor complexes. The conformation around the short helix of the molecule B of the ligand-free form and that of the molecule A of the Lys-Pro complex is quite similar to each other ( Figure S8 ), whereas relative flexibilities of the residues 90-109 estimated from temperature factors were significantly higher for the molecule B of the ligand-free form (average B-factor for whole molecule vs. that for residues 90-109: 36.3 Å 2 vs 48.7 Å 2 for the molecule B of the ligand-free form and 20.3 Å 2 vs. 22.8 Å 2 for the molecule A of the Lys-Pro complex). This observation indicates that an open-to-closed conformational change of the protomer of PmDAP IV does occur without ligand binding, and a mechanism of "conformational selection" 57,58 would exist for the substrate-binding stage of PmDAP IV.
To clarify the differences in active site architecture between PmDAP IV and mammalian DPP IV, we compared the inhibitory activities of the three classes of gliptins 46 ( Figure S5 ) against PmDAP IV and human DPP IV (Table 4 ). In general, the inhibitory activities of gliptins against human DPP IV (the order of nM) are overwhelmingly high compared to those against PmDAP IV (the order of µM). This is not unnatural because the structures of gliptins are optimised for binding with human DPP IV but not for bacterial DAP IVs. The difference might partly be due to less hydrophobic property at the bottom of the S1 subsite of PmDAP IV: Leu598 and Tyr631 in human DPP IV is replaced by Gln581 and Asn614, respectively, in PmDAP IV ( Figure S7) . The results showed that class 2 gliptins have significantly weaker inhibitory activities against PmDAP IV than class 1 and class 3 gliptins. It should be noted here that omarigliptin exhibited lower inhibitory activity against PmDAP IV as compared with the other class 3 gliptins. This can be explained by a structural feature of omarigliptin. As shown in Figure S5 , omarigliptin has less rotatable bond than the other class 3 gliptins. Therefore, omarigliptin can't fit well into the active site of PmDAP IV. The gliptin sensitivity of PmDAP IV can be explained by structurally comparing the subsites of PmDAP IV with that of human DPP IV in complex with linagliptin 59 (Fig. 8A) . Compared with human DPP IV, residues 542 to 545 of PmDAP IV protrude more into the S2′ subsite (Fig. 2) , causing a narrowing of this site; thus, this region would hinder the binding of class 2 gliptins to PmDAP IV (Fig. 8B) . In contrast to the S2′ subsite, the S2-extensive subsite of PmDAP IV is clearly larger than that of human DPP IV. The space occupied by residues 356 to 358 in human DPP IV is not occupied by protein residues in PmDAP IV (Fig. 8A) , indicating that inhibitors occupying this space might be selective inhibitors of bacterial DAP IVs (Fig. 8B) . A structural comparison of PgDPP IV and human DPP IV also revealed that the S2-extensive subsite of PgDPP IV is larger than that of human DPP IV 38 . Sitagliptin, a class 3 gliptin, is well-known as a highly selective DPP IV inhibitor 60 . Crystal structure analyses of human DPP IV in complexes with class 3 gliptins 61-64 revealed that the most important interaction between gliptins and human DPP IV for their strict DPP IV selectivity (over DPP IV-family enzymes; FAP, DPP8 and DPP9) is a hydrophobic (pi-pi) interaction between the side chain of Phe357 and the inhibitor at the S2-extensive site. By utilising the S2 extensive subsite of human DPP IV, class 3 gliptins can increase not only their inhibitory activity against human DPP IV but also their selectivity over the other DPP IV-family enzymes. Specifically, PmDAP IV (and probably DPP8 and DPP9) cannot have sufficient hydrophobic interactions with the class 3 inhibitors at the S2-extensive site, whereas FAP does not have enough space at the S2-extensive site because Phe350 of FAP partially occupies the S2-extensive site (Fig. 8) . Present structural comparisons can be applied for describing gliptin sensitivities of DPP8 and DPP9, though crystal structures of DPP8 and DPP9 have not yet been reported. DPP8 and DPP9 are known to be inhibited by class 1 gliptins (vildagliptin and saxagliptin) in vitro 60 , because the active site center (the S1 and S2 subsites) of DPP IV-family enzymes are highly conserved ( Figure S7 ), except for Arg125 region ( Figure S7 ). On the other hand, lengths and sequences around the S2′ and S2-extensive sites are less conserved as can be expected from lower sequence identity between DPP8/DPP9 and DPP IV (approximately 25%) compared with that between FAP and DPP IV (approximately 50%). Therefore, the lower sensitivities of DPP8/DPP9 against class 2 and 3 gliptins are likely to be due to structural differences around the S2′ and S2-extensive sites (Fig. 8B) .
In this study, we present the crystal structures of a bacterial DPP IV, PmDAP IV, in its free form and in complexes with dipeptides as well as with a non-peptidyl inhibitor. The crystal structure analyses and site-directed mutagenesis studies revealed a novel substrate recognition mechanism, which is possibly common to SmDAP IV-type bacterial DPP IVs but is not observed in mammalian DPP IVs. Acyl-enzyme intermediates were observed for the dipeptide complexes of PmDAP IV, whereas tetrahedral intermediates were reported for the oligopeptide complexes of mammalian DPP IVs. This difference reflects the different structural environments of the active-site Arg residues of the mammalian and bacterial enzymes. We anticipate that the present structural analyses will support the design of specific inhibitors of the DPP IVs of pathogenic organisms.
Overexpression and purification of PmDAPIV. The periplasmic form of PmDAP IV was expressed and purified as described elsewhere 65 . A gene coding for PmDAP IV (residues 1-745) was cloned from a P. mexicana WO24 genomic DNA library by a cultivation plate assay based on DPP IV activity, the hydrolysis of Gly-Pro-βnaphthylamide 7 . The PmDAP IV M12I mutant produced only the 82-kDa periplasmic form (residues 23-745) due to translation from Met1 and removal of the signal sequence (residues 1-22) 11 . The periplasmic form of PmDAP IV comprised 723 amino acids, with a theoretical molecular weight of 79981.58 and a theoretical isoelectric point of 5.80. An E. coli JM109 (Takara Bio) transformant harbouring the full-length PmDAP IV M12I mutant sequence inserted into the pUC19 (Takara Bio) expression plasmid was used to produce the periplasmic form of PmDAP IV. Cells were grown in 2 x YT media at 310 K. Overproduction of PmDAP IV was performed by IPTG induction (final concentration, 0.1 mM) at an OD 600 of approximately 0.6. Sixteen hours after induction, the cells were harvested by centrifugation at 8000 x g. The cells were disrupted using BugBuster Protein Extraction Reagent (Novagen), and the cell extract was obtained by centrifugation at 27,000 x g for 30 min. PmDAP IV in the cell extract was purified using 35 to 70% ammonium sulphate precipitation and hydrophobic column chromatography using a 20-ml HiPrep 16/10 Butyl column (GE Healthcare), which was desalted using a 50-ml HiPrep 26/10 desalting column (GE Healthcare) and finally subjected to anion-exchange column chromatography using a 1-ml Mono Q 5/50 GL column (GE Healthcare). The fractions containing PmDAP IV were pooled, and the buffer was exchanged to 80 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.5 and concentrated to 10 mg/ml using a Vivaspin 20 concentrator (GE Healthcare). The protein concentration was determined using the Bradford assay and a bovine serum albumin as a standard (Bio-Rad Laboratories). The column chromatography and other purification steps were performed at 298 K and 277 K, respectively.
To obtain ligand-free PmDAP IV crystals, the samples were crystallised using the hanging-drop method; 1 μl of protein solution (10 mg/ml PmDAP IV in 80 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.5) was mixed with the same volume of reservoir solution (20%(v/v) glycerol, 9.6%(m/v) PEG20000 and 80 mM MES pH 6.5) and incubated at 293 K. The drops were suspended over 200 μl of reservoir solution in 48-well plates. Crystals of the PmDAP IV/dipeptide (tripeptides were used as a substrate, and the N-terminal dipeptide was observed as the bound product) or inhibitor complexes were prepared as follows: Lys-Pro-Tyr, Ile X-ray data collection. Because the crystallisation conditions of the ligand-free and dipeptide/ inhibitor-bound PmDAP IVs (described above) included 20%(v/v) glycerol in the reservoir solution, X-ray data could be collected under cryogenic conditions without the need for any additional cryoprotectant. Crystals obtained using the hanging-drop method were directly mounted in nylon loops and flash-cooled in a cold nitrogen gas stream at 100 K immediately before data collection. Data were collected by the rotation method at 100 K using ADSC Quantum CCD detectors or a PILATUS-2M detector with synchrotron radiation sources at the Photon Factory. Laue group and unit-cell parameters were determined using the XDS software package 66 . The resulting cell parameters and data-collection statistics are summarised in Table 1 .
Structure determination and refinement. The initial phase determination was performed using the molecular replacement method and one protomer of SmDAP IV 37 (PDB code: 2ECF) as the search model. Cross-rotation and translation functions were calculated using the programme MOLREP 67 from the CCP4 suite 68 . Automatic model building and refinement were carried out using the programs ARP/wARP 69 and REFMAC5 70 , and further iterative manual model building and refinement were performed using the programs Coot 71 and REFMAC5. The stereochemistry of the model was verified using the program RAMPAGE 72 . The refined structure of the ligand-free PmDAP IV was then used for the structural determination of the dipeptide or inhibitor complexes by the difference Fourier method. The occupancies of ligand atoms of ligand complexes were estimated by varying the occupancies of ligand atoms set at 0.60 to 0.95, in increments of 0.05. The results showed that the temperature factors of P1-Pro became closer to those of the surrounding atoms, without producing a positive residual peak in the |Fo|−|Fc| map, when the occupancies of the ligand atoms were set at 0.90. Occupancies below 0.90 resulted in positive residual peaks in the |Fo|−|Fc| map for the bound ligand atoms. After the final round of refinement, the ligand molecule and the Oγ atom of Ser613 were removed from the model. Then, the amplitude |Fc| and phase angles calculated from the partial structure were used to calculate a weighted m|Fo|-D|Fc| omit map 70 , where m is the figure of merit (approximately equal to the cosine of the phase error) and D is the estimate of the coordinate error in the partial structure ( Figure S1 ). The refinement statistics are summarised in Table 2 .
of PmDAP IV, which is involved in the recognition of the carbonyl group of the P2 residue of the substrate peptide, was mutated to Ala or Lys. The mutants were expressed and purified using the method described above for wild-type PmDAP IV. Recombinant human DPP IV was purchased from ATGen Co., Ltd. (Los Angeles, USA). Kinetic parameters were determined by fitting the experimental data to the Michaelis-Menten equation using Excel Solver (Microsoft) by nonlinear least squares fitting for different concentrations (0.78, 1.56, 3.13, 6.25, 12.5, 25, 50 and 100 µM) of glycyl-L-proline 4-methylcoumaryl-7-amide (Gly-Pro-MCA, Peptide Institute) as a substrate. The enzyme reaction was performed in a reaction buffer containing 50 mM sodium phosphate buffer pH 8.0, 5 mM EDTA and 0.005% Tween 20 at 298 K for 20 min, and standard deviations were calculated from three independent experiments. The fluorescence intensity of the released MCA was measured with excitation at 355 nm and emission at 460 nm using an Infinite 200 PRO microplate reader (TECAN). The relative activities of the wild-type and mutant PmDAP IVs and human DPP IV are summarised in Table 3 .
Inhibitor sensitivities of PmDAP IV and human DPP IV. Gliptins and diprotin A were purchased from NAMIKI SHOJI Co., Ltd. (Tokyo, Japan) and Peptide Institute, Inc. (Osaka, Japan), respectively. Half-maximal inhibitory concentration (IC 50 ) values were determined by fitting to a sigmoid curve (4-parameter logistic curve) using ImageJ 73 . Competitive inhibition rates were measured using different concentrations of each inhibitor in a reaction buffer containing 50 mM sodium phosphate buffer pH 8.0, 5 mM EDTA and 0.005% Tween 20 at 298 K for 20 min and using 100 µM Gly-Pro-MCA as the substrate. Inhibitor concentrations for PmDAP IV were 0.78, 1.56, 3.13, 6.25, 12.5, 25, 50 and 100 µM, and those for human DPP IV were 0.78, 1.56, 3.13, 6.25, 12.5, 25, 50 and 100 nM. Standard deviations were calculated from three independent experiments. Fluorescence intensity was measured with excitation at 355 nm and emission at 460 nm using an Infinite 200 PRO microplate reader. Inhibition constants (K i ) were calculated using the Cheng-Prusoff equation 74 . Gliptin sensitivities and diprotin A sensitivities of the wild-type and mutant PmDAP IVs and human DPP IV are summarised in Tables 4 and 5 , respectively.
Graphical programs. Figures 1 to 5, 8 , S1, S3 and S8 were produced using the programmes UCSF Chimera 75 and Adobe Illustrator (Adobe Systems Inc., San Jose, California, USA). Figures 6, 7 and S2, S4 to S7 were produced using Adobe Illustrator.