A schematic figure showing the system of opposing anti-and pro-phagocytic signals affecting macrophage-mediated PrCR. (b) A schematic of migration of neutrophils and monocyte/macrophages after thioglycollate injection. RNAseq data for WT and MRP8-Bcl2 neutrophils was compared between populations in the bone marrow (immature) and peritoneal cavity (mature). (c) Venn diagram showing the groups of genes that were upregulated in peritoneal vs. bone marrow neutrophils from WT mice (right; susceptible to programmed cell death and programmed cell removal (PrCR)) and MRP8-Bcl2 mice (left; inhibited programmed cell death but not PrCR). The overalaping 333 genes that increase in expression during neutrophil maturation are potentially PrCR-relevant. Figure 2 . Cell surface CRT determines programmed cell removal of neutrophils in peritonitis (a) Cell surface levels of CRT on neutrophils 8 and 24 hrs after thioglycolate injection, by flow cytometry analysis. (b) Immunofluorescent staining of CRT in human neutrophils and macrophages. CRT is undetectable in neutrophils but abundant in macrophages. CRT localized to perinuclear regions, vesicles and cell surface of macrophages. (c) Secretion of CRT by resting and activated macrophages. ELISA assay showing the amount of CRT in medium with macrophages in culture. Bone marrow-derived macrophages were treated with 0, 5, 20, 50, 100ng ml -1 of lipopolysacharide (LPS) overnight for activation. n=3 for each condition. *P<0.05 (t test) for CRT secretion between ctrl and LPS treatment. (d) Viability of macrophages in culture. Bone marrow-derived macrophages were treated with 0 or 100ng ml -1 of lipopolysacharide (LPS) overnight and collected for viability measurement. Cells that were AnnexinV-DAPI-were considered as viable cells. More than 90% of the cells were viable. n.s. (t test), no significant differences in cell viability was observed in control and LPS treated cells. n=3 for each condition. Target cells used in phagocytosis assay were viable before they were engulfed by macrophages. SW620 cells were collected from the cell culture dish directly (a) or incubated in the experimental condition for phagocytosis assay for 2hrs (b), and cell viability was measured by staining with sytox blue and AnnexinV and analyzed by flow cytometry. Cells that were AnnexinV-sytox blue-were considered as viable cells. More than 95% of the cells were viable and incubation in the experimental condition for phagocytosis assay showed no decrease in cell viability. (c)-(e), Measurement of cellular engulfment of target cancer cells during PrCR. SW620-GFP cells were treated with or without LysoTracker Red DND-99 and incubated with mouse bone marrow-derived macrophages for phagocytosis. Phagocytic index was defined as the percentage of macrophages that phagocytosed target cells. LysoTracker probes are excited at acidic PH with an emission of 590nm (measured in PE channel). No phagocytosis was detected in PE channel when cells were not pre-loaded with LysoTracker probes. When cells were pre-loaded with LysoTracker probes, phagocytic indices analyzed based on GFP and PE signals showed no difference (c), indicating target cells were engulfed and delivered to acidic organelles for digestion instead of staying attaching to macrophage cell surface. ** P<0.01 (t test) for phagocytic indices analyzed based on GFP and PE signals without LysoTracker. n.s. (t test), no significant differences in phagocytic indices analyzed based on GFP and PE signals when using LysoTracker. Figure 6 . Neuraminidase treatment promoted PrCR of living cancer cells but showed no effect on cell proliferation and survival (a)-(d), Measurement of cell viability and proliferation after neuraminidase treatment. SW620-GFP cells were treated with heat inactivated neuraminidase (a) or neuraminidase (b). Cell viability was measured by staining with sytox blue and AnnexinV and analyzed by flow cytometry. More than 95% of the cells were viable. c & d, representative FACS analyses showing measurement of cell viability after coculturing macrophages and target cancer cells. Phagocytosis assays were performed with SW620 cells pre-treated with heat inactivated neuraminidase or neuraminidase as target cells. Mouse bone marrow-derived macrophages were used for the assay. After co-culture for 2 hours, macrophages (F4/80+) and surviving cancer cells (GFP+F4/80-) were stained with sytox blue and AnnexinV. Cells that were AnnexinV-sytox blue-were considered as viable cells. More than 95% of macrophages and SW620 cells were viable. Incubation with macrophages did not induce cells death for cancer cells. (e), Cell viability of SW620 cells treated with heat inactivated neuraminidase or neuraminidase. SW620-GFP cells were treated with heat inactivated neuraminidase or neuraminidase. Cell viability was measured immediately after the treatment (Day 0) or after the cells were put back to culture for 10 days. Cells that were AnnexinV-sytox blue-were considered as viable cells. n.s. (t test), no significant differences between control and neuramindase-treated groups. More than 95% of the cells were viable, indicating neuraminidase treatment showed no effect in inducing cell death. (f), Cell proliferation of SW620 cells treated with heat inactivated neuraminidase or neuraminidase. SW620-GFP cells were treated with heat inactivated neuraminidase or neuraminidase. Cells after treatment were put back to culture and cell growth was monitored by counting cell numbers. n.s. (t test), no significant differences between control and neuramindase-treated groups. After a 10-day culture no significant difference in cell growth was observed between control and neuraminidase-treated cell, indicating neuraminidase treatment showed no effect in inhibiting cell proliferation. Cell growth was normalized to the growth of control group. Error bars represent standard deviation in (e) and (f).