Here, we present the calculation of vaccine effectiveness (VE) for the Netherlands in 2014-15 and 2015-16 stratified for particular risk groups, namely chronic conditions and older age.
Influenza-like illness was defined as the acute onset of fever (measured temperature ≥38 °C), with muscle pain or headache and cough or sore throat (designated as ILI hist case definition in the Text box Case Definitions). The analyses included only the participants that submitted at least 3 symptom surveys throughout the monitoring season, designated as "active" participants.
Weekly ILI incidences of "active" participants were used, causing a slight difference in the mean number of participants for the different periods considered. The weekly ILI incidence was defined as the number of participants who reported the onset of ILI in that week, divided by the person-time of active participation during the same week. The person-time of active participation per week was defined as the number of participants who were active during any day(s) of that week multiplied by the fraction of that week during which each participant was active.
We considered only the ILI cases in the weeks when there was virological confirmation of influenza by the Dutch Sentinel Practice Network, and of these cases, we used only the number of ILI cases above a seasonal baseline incidence for non-epidemic ILI.
The baseline corresponds to the typical number of ILI cases measured in the absence of circulating influenza viruses and was determined as baseline = 275 + 75 cosine ((week number -2) / 52) x 360). These values were chosen as they gave the best fit for the Netherlands results in 13 seasons (also considering ILI cases in summer when the Dutch Influenzanet surveyed year round during the 2009 pandemic) [1] ( Figure A1 ).
By excluding the weeks when there was no virological confirmation of influenza, we exclude the period when most ILI cases were likely due to non-influenza infections; and by considering only the number of ILI cases above the typical number of ILI cases measured in the absence of circulating viruses, one can therefore obtain a more accurate proxy of the VE against influenza. The VE calculated in this way is here designated as VE(influenza) (Table A1 and Figure 3 ). Table A1 lists the overall attack rates (AR) for ILI in vaccinated and non-vaccinated participants in 2014-15 and 2015-16, alongside with the estimated relative risk (RR) and vaccine efficacy (VE), for all participants overall, and stratified according to the presence vs. absence of chronic conditions and/or older age. The AR for a given period was calculated as the total number of new ILI cases in each group of participants divided by the mean number of weekly active participants in that group, during that period. The relative risk (RR) was calculated dividing the AR in vaccinated by the AR in non-vaccinated participants. The vaccine effectiveness (VE) was determined as the relative risk reduction in vaccinated participants (i.e., VE=[1-RR]x100). The 95% confidence intervals were estimated using the LaMorte Biostatistics tool. 