Highlights d Viral infection leads to redox dysregulation including the downregulation of SOD1 d Sod1 À/À mice exhibit aggravated viral hepatitis, which is rescued by antioxidants d IFN-I signaling via STAT1 drives SOD1 downregulation and early liver damage d Ablation of IFN-I signaling ameliorates viral hepatitis in Sod1 À/À and WT mice Correspondence abergthaler@cemm.oeaw.ac.at
More than 500 million people worldwide are infected with Hepatitis B virus (HBV), Hepatitis C virus (HCV), or other hepatotropic viruses. These viral infections often lead to liver damage and associated complications such as advanced liver fibrosis, cirrhosis, and hepatocellular carcinoma, which cause substantial morbidity and mortality (Guidotti and Chisari, 2006; Park and Rehermann, 2014) . The complex pathology of viral hepatitis is driven by multiple viral and host factors interacting with various immune cell populations and cytokines such as type I interferon-I (IFN-I) (Park and Rehermann, 2014; Schoggins et al., 2011) . Together, these determinants mediate the antiviral response, but they also lead to subsequent immunopathology and tissue damage (Guidotti and Chisari, 2006; Medzhitov et al., 2012; Rouse and Sehrawat, 2010 ). Yet, the mechanisms involved are largely unknown.
Perturbations in several metabolic and cellular stress pathways induced by viral infections have been associated with liver disease (Drakesmith and Prentice, 2008; Koike and Moriya, 2005; Sheikh et al., 2008; Stauffer et al., 2012) . Such imbalance in the host redox system resulting from infections such as HBV and HCV affects many processes governing intracellular homeostasis and signaling (Bolukbas et al., 2005; Nathan and Cunningham-Bussel, 2013; Okuda et al., 2002; Schieber and Chandel, 2014) . Cells have evolved dedicated antioxidant enzymatic systems including superoxide dismutases (SODs), catalases, peroxidases, and reductases, which act as rheostats to counteract redox imbalances (Miao and St Clair, 2009; Nathan and Cunningham-Bussel, 2013; Schieber and Chandel, 2014) . However, the mechanisms initiating and promoting oxidative stress and the subsequent tissue damage in viral hepatitis remain unclear.
In this study, we employed two unrelated mouse infection models to dissect host determinants of viral hepatitis, i.e., the noncytolytic lymphocytic choriomeningitis virus (LCMV) (Zinkernagel et al., 1986) and the cytolytic mouse hepatitis virus (MHV) (Cervantes-Barragan et al., 2007) . We uncovered an essential role for the antioxidant SOD1 in protecting hepatocytes from virusinduced oxidative stress and cell death. Further, our data identifies IFN-I signaling as a key inducer of virus-mediated oxidative liver damage, exposing innate immunity as a driver of liver pathology. These results provide insights into the molecular pathogenesis of viral hepatitis and infection-associated tissue damage.
To obtain an unbiased view of global gene expression in the liver in the early phase of a chronic viral infection, we infected wild-type (WT) mice with LCMV strain clone 13 and performed transcriptional profiling of liver tissue at different time points by RNA-seq ( Figure 1A , Table S1 ). The differentially up-or downregulated transcripts were subjected to gene ontology (GO) analysis. As expected, genes involved in innate immune and inflammatory responses were significantly overrepresented (Figure 1B) . The most highly enriched GO term was related to oxidation-reduction processes. Further analysis by k-means clustering revealed distinct patterns of transcriptional up-and downregulation among this group of transcripts ( Figure 1C , Table S2 ), which included genes with antioxidant function such as glutathione S-transferases, hemoxygenase, and metallothioneins, as well as SODs ( Figure 1D , Table S1 ). The SOD family members SOD1, SOD2, and SOD3 are crucial scavengers of O 2 À (Miao and St Clair, 2009) . SOD1 (also known as Cu/Zn-SOD) is ubiquitously expressed, localized in the cytoplasm, nucleus and mitochondrial intermembrane space and has been linked to human diseases such as amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (Miao and St Clair, 2009 ). Yet, little is known about the role of SOD enzymes in the context of infection. Decreased levels of SOD1 were found in patients chronically infected with HCV (Diamond et al., 2012; Levent et al., 2006) , in HCV-induced hepatocellular carcinoma (Dillon et al., 2013; Megger et al., 2013) , as well as in HBV-associated cancer tissue (Kim et al., 2003) . This Table S1 . (B) Gene ontology enrichment analysis of significantly regulated transcripts from RNaseq data.
(C) K-means clustering of gene regulatory profiles from the GO term oxidation reduction. Individual genes are represented by different colored lines. See also Table S2 .
(D) Selection of differentially regulated genes involved in oxidation-reduction related processes (Experimental Procedures).
(E) mRNA expression of Sod1 was determined by real-time PCR from liver tissue of WT mice that were either left uninfected or infected with LCMV 44 hr previously (n = 7-12 mice per group pooled from three independent experiments). (F) Western blot for SOD1 and actin were performed from liver lysates of WT mice that were either left uninfected or infected with LCMV 44 hr previously (representative results are shown). Relative protein ratios of SOD1 to actin were quantified by LI-COR (n = 11 mice per group pooled from three independent experiments). Statistical significance was calculated by unpaired t test (E and F). Symbols represent the mean ± SEM.
coincided with our observation that infection with LCMV resulted in a downregulation of SOD1 expression at the RNA (Figures 1D and 1E) and protein level (Figure 1F ).
To investigate whether SOD enzymes contribute to viral hepatitis, we infected Sod1 À/À , Sod2 +/À -a commonly used model for Sod2 deficiency (Boelsterli and Hsiao, 2008 )-and Sod3 À/À mice with LCMV and monitored the course of disease. Sod1 À/À but not Sod2 +/À or Sod3 À/À mice lost more body weight compared to WT mice, which started in the early phase of infection (Figure 2A, Figure S1A ). Next, we assessed serum concentrations of alanine aminotransferase (ALT), a routinely used clinical parameter of hepatitis. Again, Sod1 À/À mice, but neither Sod2 +/À nor Sod3 À/À mice, showed highly elevated concentrations of ALT ( Figure 2B , Figure S1B ) within the first 2 days of infection. We also measured two alternative parameters for hepatitis, aspartate aminotransferase (AST) and alkaline phosphatase (AP), and found elevated concentrations in Sod1 À/À compared to WT mice ( Figure 2C ). In addition, we observed an early increase of ALT in WT mice upon LCMV infection (Figure 2B) . The serum concentrations of blood urea nitrogen and creatinine, which represent parameters of kidney damage, were comparable between Sod1 À/À and WT mice upon LCMV infection ( Figure S1C ), suggesting a non-generalized pathogenesis that is primarily affecting the liver. SOD2 and SOD3 were dispensable for liver protection in our experiments, which might be due to lower expression in the liver (Marklund, 1984) or different biological properties including metal cofactors and subcellular localization. To study the effects of the virus infection dose on the observed pathology, we infected Sod1 À/À and WT mice with either a low dose of LCMV strain clone 13 or with another LCMV strain ARM that is usually cleared within 8 days.
In either case we observed increased hepatitis in Sod1 À/À mice compared to WT mice (Figure S1D) , suggesting that the pathology is independent of the infection inoculum and LCMV strain. Together, our results indicate that SOD1 plays a nonredundant protective role in viral hepatitis and liver damage. Upon infection Sod1 À/À and WT mice showed comparable viral loads in blood ( Figure 2D ), liver (Figure 2E) , and spleen and kidney (Figure S1E) , which argued against a role for SOD1 in virus control. Histological analysis of infected liver tissue revealed pathologic lesions in infected Sod1 À/À mice, which were absent in infected WT mice and in uninfected Sod1 À/À and WT mice (Figure 2F ). This was associated with increased expression of cell-death-associated genes (Figure 2G ) and more cleaved caspase-3 positive hepatocytes in the liver at 16 hr after infection ( Figure 2H ), indicating the rapid activation of apoptotic pathways in infected Sod1 À/À mice. Thirty days after infection with LCMV strain clone 13 Sod1 À/À mice showed fibrotic processes in the liver tissue as indicated by increased Col1a1 mRNA expression (Figure 2I) . A similar increase of Col1a1 expression was observed also upon infection with the acute LCMV strain ARM (Figure S1F ). More than 100 days after infection, Sod1 À/À mice showed recovered body weight compared to WT mice (Figure S1G ) and comparable residual viral RNA in the liver ( Figure S1H ). Histopathological analyses of liver tissue for H/E and cleaved caspase 3 revealed no differences be-tween Sod1 À/À and WT mice ( Figure S1I ). Yet, we found increased levels of 8-oxoguanine (8-oxoG), a marker for oxidative damage, in the liver tissue of Sod1 À/À mice at 123 days after infection (Figure S1I) . Oxidative stress is considered to play a pathogenic role in liver fibrosis (Parola and Robino, 2001; Sá nchez-Valle et al., 2012) . In line with this and our Col1a1 expression data, Sod1 À/À mice showed an accumulated deposition of collagen fibers compared to WT mice as detected by Elastica-van Gieson ( Figure 2J ) and Sirius Red staining ( Figure 2K ). Together, this indicated that Sod1 À/À mice exhibited increased fibrotic changes during the late phase of infection compared to WT mice.
To investigate whether the SOD1-mediated protection of the liver constituted a general host mechanism during viral infections, we infected Sod1 À/À and WT mice with the cytolytic murine coronavirus MHV. Similar to our previous findings with the noncytolytic LCMV, the lack of SOD1 resulted in increased body weight loss (Figure S1J ) and elevated concentrations of ALT (Figure S1K) . Further, we observed more histopathological lesions after infection ( Figure S1L ) despite similar viral loads in the liver ( Figure S1M ). Together, these results suggest that SOD1 plays a general protective role in the liver during viral infection.
To determine whether oxidative damage was responsible for the exacerbated liver pathology observed in infected Sod1 À/À mice, we adopted several complementary approaches. First, we stained liver tissue of uninfected Sod1 À/À mice for 8-oxoG and found no differences in 8-oxoG staining compared to uninfected WT mice ( Figure 3A ). LCMV infection, however, led to elevated staining of 8-oxoG in hepatocytes of Sod1 À/À mice at 16 hr after infection ( Figure 3A ), confirming increased virus-induced oxidative damage in the liver. Likewise, we detected elevated mRNA expression of Atf3 ( Figure 3B ), encoding a transcription factor that is induced by reactive oxygen species (ROS) and plays an important role in immunoregulation (Gilchrist et al., 2006; Hoetzenecker et al., 2012) . The observed transient cellular damage as seen by histological staining for 8-oxoG and cleaved caspase 3 at 16 hr after infection might be due to refractoriness of JAK-STAT signaling after sustained IFN-I signaling in liver tissue during viral infection (Sarasin-Filipowicz et al., 2009) . Thus, SOD1 is required to prevent oxidative damage in the liver upon viral infection.
We next aimed to identify the cellular compartments that require SOD1 to protect against oxidative damage. Bonemarrow-chimeric mice were generated by reciprocal transfer of Sod1 À/À and WT genotypes followed by administration of liposomal clodronate to deplete remaining radioresistant macrophages. Chimerism was confirmed in liver and spleen by using a congenic marker ( Figures S2A and S2B ). Upon LCMV infection, Sod1 À/À /Sod1 À/À and WT/Sod1 À/À , but not WT/WT nor Sod1 À/À /WT chimeric mice exhibited elevated concentrations of ALT ( Figure 3C ). This result indicates an essential role for SOD1 in the non-hematopoietic compartment, of which hepatocytes comprise the major cell population in the liver.
In support of these findings, ROS production was also observed in vitro in primary mouse hepatocytes upon LCMV infection by staining with the oxidation-sensitive fluorogenic probe CellROX Deep Red Reagent (CellROX) ( Figure 3D , Figures S2C and  S2D ), which was reversed by treatment with the antioxidant (C) Aspartate aminotransferase (AST) and alkaline phosphatase (AP) were analyzed 24 hr after infection (n = 10 mice per group). One out of R two similar experiments is shown. (D and E) Viral loads from blood (D) and liver (E) were determined by focus-forming assay (n = 3-7). (F) Liver sections were stained for hematoxylin/eosin (H/E) (n = 3 mice per group, scale bar represents 200 mm). Representative images are shown. Pathologic lesions are highlighted by arrow and insert. (G) Comparison of a subset of RNA-seq-derived significantly differentially regulated genes involved in cell death is shown from infected versus uninfected WT or Sod1 À/À mice (n = 3 mice per group).
(legend continued on next page) Immunity 43, 974-986, November 17, 2015 ª2015 The Authors 977 copper(II) (3,5-diisopropyl salicylate)4 (CuDIPS), a non-peptide O 2 À scavenger that mimics SOD1 activity (Laurent et al., 2004) .
To test the potential effects of antioxidant treatment on virusinduced liver damage, we assessed the effect of CuDIPS in vivo. This ameliorated the virus-induced increase in concentrations of ALT in Sod1 À/À mice upon infection ( Figure 3E ) and led to a reduction of Atf3 mRNA expression ( Figure 3F ). Together, these data reveal that oxidative stress in hepatocytes plays a fundamental role in the observed virus-induced liver pathology.
T Cells and NK Cells Are Not Involved in the Virus-Induced SOD1-Dependent Liver Pathology T cells play a major immunopathological role in HBV and HCV infection, as well as in the hitherto-described model of LCMV hepatitis (Guidotti and Chisari, 2006; Lang et al., 2013; Park and Rehermann, 2014; Zinkernagel et al., 1986) . We found comparable numbers of infiltrating CD8 + and CD4 + T cells in the liver tissue of infected Sod1 À/À and WT mice at 24 hr after infection ( Figures 4A and 4B ). Next, we assessed T cell responses in Sod1 À/À and WT mice after LCMV infection and found no major differences in virus-specific CD8 + T cells (Figures S3A-S3I) and CD4 + T cells ( Figures S3J-S3M ). In addition, T cell receptor beta chain (Tcrb) À/À / Sod1 À/À ( Figure 4C ) and perforin 1 (Prf1) À/À / Sod1 À/À bone marrow chimeric mice ( Figure 4D ), lacking either ab T cells or the hematopoietically-expressed cytolytic effector protein PRF1 respectively, exhibited liver damage similar to controls upon infection. Thus, the SOD1-dependent pathology occurs independently of T cells. NK cells are important regulators of T cell function as well as liver inflammation (Crouse et al., 2014; Rehermann, 2013; Waggoner et al., 2012; Xu et al., 2014) and we, therefore, investigated the potential role of NK cells in the observed liver pathology. Yet, we did not detect any differences in liver-infiltrating NK cells ( Figure 4E ) nor found any change of pathology upon the depletion of NK cells ( Figures 4F and 4G ). To study the potential involvement of leucocyte populations other than T cells and NK cells, we (H) Liver sections were stained for cleaved caspase-3 and numbers of positive cells are shown as mean ± SEM (n = 3 mice per group, scale bar represents 200 mm). Representative images are shown. Insert shows a hepatocyte positive for cleaved caspase-3. (I) Col1a1 mRNA was determined by real-time PCR in liver tissue 30 days after infection and fold-change was calculated between infected WT and Sod1 À/À mice (n = 10 mice per group, pooled from three experiments). Liver tissue was stained by Elastica van Gieson (J) and Sirius Red. (K). Pictures are representative of 9 or 10 infected mice per genotype (pooled from two independent experiments collected on day 103 and day 123, respectively, after LCMV infection) and n = 5 uninfected mice per genotype (scale bars represent 20 mm). Numbers represent the means ± SEM derived from automated quantification (% of area) based on the analysis of 5 high-power fields per sample. Statistical significance was calculated by two-way ANOVA (A, B, D, E, H) or by unpaired t test (C, I-K). Symbols/bars represent the mean ± SEM. (B) WT and Sod1 À/À mice were infected with LCMV. Atf3 mRNA levels were determined in liver tissue before and after infection by real-time PCR (n = 3 mice per group). One out of R two similar experiments is shown. (C) Bone marrow-chimeric mice were generated by reciprocal transfer of Sod1 À/À and WT genotypes. Serum ALT levels of mice infected with LCMV are shown (n = 5-8 mice per group pooled from two experiments). p values are derived from the comparison to the control group of WT/WT mice. (D) Primary hepatocytes from WT mice were left uninfected or infected with LCMV (MOI 5) +/À treatment with 10 mM CuDIPS before staining with CellROX. Scale bar represents 20 mm. Representative images are shown. Quantification was performed by CellProfiler and numbers represent mean ± SEM. One out of R two similar experiments is shown. (E and F) WT and Sod1 À/À mice, which received either 10 mg/kg body weight CuDIPS or solvent, were infected with LCMV and (E) serum levels of ALT (n = 12 mice per group, pooled from three independent experiments) and (F) Atf3 mRNA in liver tissue were measured 44 hr after infection (n = 8 mice per time point, pooled from two independent experiments). Statistical significance was calculated by Two-way (A-C, E) or one-way (D and F) ANOVA with Bonferroni correction. Symbols represent the mean ± SEM. performed a cellular profiling of liver and spleen tissue and detected comparable infiltration of inflammatory monocytes, plasmacytoid dendritic cells, neutrophils, and eosinophils at 24 hr after infection ( Figures S3N-S3Q ). Together, these data indicate that T and NK cells are unlikely to be causally involved in the SOD1dependent pathology and exclude a profoundly altered recruitment of inflammatory myeloid populations to the liver, arguing in favor of a hepatocyte-intrinsic defect in infected Sod1 À/À mice.
In the early phase of infection, we found a more pronounced upregulation of interferon-stimulated genes in Sod1 À/À compared to WT mice ( Figure 5A , Table S1 ). We also detected increased phosphorylation of signal transducer and activator of transcription 1 (STAT1), a downstream effector of IFN-I, in hepatocytes of Sod1 À/À compared to WT mice ( Figure 5B ). This prompted us to further investigate the potential role of IFN-I signaling in SOD1dependent liver damage upon viral infection. We found that LCMV-infected Sod1 À/À mice exhibited higher serum concentrations of IFN-a compared to WT mice ( Figure 5C ), which might itself be driven by the increased phosphorylation of STAT1 upon oxidative stress (Kim and Lee, 2005) . Furthermore, we infected Sod1 À/À mice with a replication-defective recombinant LCMV vector (rLCMV), which is capable of only a single round of infection . rLCMV hardly induced any serum IFN-a ( Figure 5C ) and did not lead to a marked increase of ALT ( Figure 5D ), despite exhibiting high viral RNA loads in the liver ( Figure S4A ). Together, these findings demonstrate that propagating virus results in excessive oxidative damage in hepatocytes of Sod1 À/À mice, which was associated with the induction of IFN-I.
To address whether IFN-I induces oxidative stress, we first treated cells in vitro with rIFN-a and observed accumulation of ROS ( Figure 5E ). Next, we treated mice with rIFN-a, which resulted in the upregulation of the IFN-stimulated gene Ifit1 in both Sod1 À/À and WT mice ( Figure S4B ). Importantly, rIFN-a led to increased expression of Atf3 mRNA ( Figure 5F ) and was sufficient to induce hepatitis as measured by ALT in Sod1 À/À mice in the absence of infection ( Figure 5G ). In agreement with this, elevation of IFN-a induced by the neurotropic vesicular stomatitis virus (VSV) ( Figure S4C ) also resulted in increased concentrations of ALT in Sod1 À/À compared to WT mice (Figure S4D) , indicating that systemic IFN-I is sufficient to induce liver damage in the absence of SOD1. Moreover, treatment with rIFN-a downregulated Sod1 expression in WT mice (Figure 5H) , similar to what we observed upon viral infection ( Figures  1D-1F ), suggesting a direct involvement of IFN-I signaling in the regulation of Sod1 expression.
To further dissect the role of IFN-I signaling in virus-induced oxidative liver damage, we transplanted bone marrow of WT or Irf7 À/À mice, which lack the master regulator of IFN-I dependent immune responses, into Sod1 À/À recipient mice. Upon viral infection, we observed reduced serum concentrations of IFN-a and ALT in Irf7 À/À /Sod1 À/À mice compared to WT/Sod1 À/À mice ( Figure 6A ). This demonstrates that IFN-a derived from hematopoietic cells contributes to tissue damage. Previous studies have shown that a lack of phagocytes resulted in reduced concentrations of serum IFN-a (Louten et al., 2006) . Indeed, (C) Tcrb À/À or (D) Prf1 À/À (perforin 1) as well as WT bone marrow was transferred into irradiated Sod1 À/À donor mice (n = 6 mice per group from two pooled experiments). Serum levels of alanine aminotransferase (ALT) were measured upon infection with LCMV. (E) Natural killer cells (NK1.1 + ) were quantified in the liver 24 hr after LCMV infection (n = 4-5 mice per group). (F) NK cells were depleted in WT and Sod1 À/À mice with the anti-NK1.1 specific antibody. Depletion of NK cells was confirmed by flow cytometry in spleen and liver. (G) Sod1 À/À and WT mice, either NK1.1 depleted or treated with isotype, were infected with LCMV and serum levels of ALT were determined (n = 4 mice per group). Statistical significance was calculated by one-way (A, B, and E) ANOVA or by two-way (C, D, and G) ANOVA with Bonferroni correction. Symbols represent mean ± SEM. Sod1 À/À mice treated with liposomal clodronate to deplete phagocytic cells had reduced concentrations of serum IFN-a upon infection ( Figure 6B ), which was accompanied by lower concentrations of ALT ( Figure 6C ).
To study the causative role of IFN-I in virus-induced oxidative tissue damage, we infected mice lacking IFN-a/b receptor 1 (IFNAR1) with LCMV. Ifnar1 À/À mice exhibited reduced concentrations of ALT compared to WT mice ( Figure 6D ) and a decreased induction of Atf3 mRNA in the liver after infection ( Figure 6E ), confirming the central role of IFN-I signaling in mediating liver damage. In line with these findings, infected Stat1 À/À mice were also protected from liver damage (Figure 6F ). This correlated with the absence of Sod1 mRNA downregulation in infected Stat1 À/À mice ( Figure 6G ), suggesting that STAT1 signaling negatively regulates the expression of Sod1.
To further investigate the role of IFN-I signaling in mediating liver damage in Sod1 À/À mice, we crossed Sod1 À/À mice to Stat1 À/À mice. Indeed, these double gene-deficient mice were protected from virus-induced early hepatitis ( Figure 6H ). The proximity of the Sod1 and Ifnar1 genes (1.42cM) prevented us from generating double gene-deficient mice of this combination. Comparison of a subset of RNA-seq-derived significantly differentially regulated interferon-stimulated genes from LCMV infected versus uninfected WT and Sod1 À/À mice (n = 3 mice per group). See also Table S1. (B) Liver sections were stained for STAT1 phosphorylation 16 hr after infection with LCMV. Arrows highlight positive nuclei. Numbers of phospho-STAT1 positive cells per mm 2 are shown as mean ± SEM (n = 3 mice per group, scale bar represents 200 mm). Representative images are shown. (C and D) WT and Sod1 À/À mice were infected with LCMV and, in addition, Sod1 À/À mice with a rLCMV vector. (C) IFN-a and (D) ALT were measured in the serum (n = 6 mice per group). (E) RAW264.7 macrophages and primary hepatocytes from WT mice were stimulated with 2000 U/ml recombinant mouse IFN-a (rIFN-a) or left unstimulated. 24 hr later cells were stained with CellROX. Scale bar represents 20 mm. Representative images are shown. Quantification was performed by CellProfiler and numbers represent mean ± SEM. (F-H) WT respectively Sod1 À/À mice were treated with 100ng of rIFN-a. (F) Atf3 and (H) Sod1 mRNA were determined by real-time PCR in the liver 12 hr later, and (G) serum levels of ALT were measured (n = 4-6 mice per group). (C-H) one out of R two similar experiments is shown. Statistical significance was calculated by two-way (B, C, D, and G) ANOVA, one-way (F) ANOVA with Bonferroni correction, or by unpaired t test (E and H). Symbols and bars represent the mean ± SEM. Figure 6 . Non-hematopoietically Derived Type I Interferon Signals to IFNAR1 Expressed on Hepatocytes and Causes Liver Pathology (A) Serum levels of IFN-a (n = 6 mice) and ALT (n = 10 or 11 mice pooled from three independent experiments) of WT/Sod1 À/À and Irf7 À/À /Sod1 À/À chimeric mice 24 hr after infection with LCMV. (B) IFN-a and (C) ALT of Sod1 À/À mice infected with LCMV upon treatment with liposomal clodronate or empty liposomes (n = 4 mice per group). One out of R two similar experiments is shown. (D and E) WT and Ifnar1 À/À mice were infected with LCMV. Levels of (D) serum ALT and (E) Atf3 mRNA in the liver were measured at 42 hr after infection (D and E, n = 4 mice). One out of R two similar experiments is shown. (F) WT and Stat1 À/À mice were infected with LCMV and levels of serum ALT (n = 4 mice) were measured. One out of R two similar experiments is shown. (G) Sod1 mRNA (n = 4-9 mice pooled from three experiments) in the liver were measured at 42 hr after infection. (H) WT, Sod1 À/À and Stat1 À/À Sod1 À/À mice were infected with LCMV and levels of serum ALT were measured (n = 4 mice per group). (I) WT/WT, WT/Ifnar1 À/À , and WT/Stat1 À/À chimeric mice were infected with LCMV and levels of serum ALT at 36-39 hr after infection were measured (n = 8 mice pooled from two experiments). (J and K) WT mice, Cre-Alb ERT2 x Ifnar1 fl/WT or Cre-Alb ERT2 x Ifnar1 WT/WT (designated as Cre-Alb ERT2 3 Ifnar1 WT in the graph) and Cre-Alb ERT2 x Ifnar1 fl/fl mice were administered 1 mg tamoxifen in sunflower oil i.p. each for 5 consecutive days, subsequently infected with LCMV and (J) levels of serum ALT and (K) viral loads in the liver 72 hr after infection were measured (n = 4 or 5 mice per group). Statistical significance was calculated by unpaired t test (A and G), two-way (B-D, F, H, J) or one-way (E, I, and K) ANOVA with Bonferroni correction. Symbols and bars represent the mean ± SEM. Further, we also observed that WT/Ifnar1 À/À and WT/ Stat1 À/À bone marrow chimeric mice were protected from early hepatitis upon LCMV infection (Figure 6I) , suggesting that the liver damage is mediated by nonhematopoietic IFNAR1-STAT1 signaling. Finally, genetic ablation of Ifnar1 specifically in hepatocytes was sufficient to confer protection ( Figure 6J ) despite comparable viral loads ( Figure 6K ). Collectively, these results provide evidence that the death of hepatocytes is mediated by cellintrinsic IFN-I signaling through the IFNAR1-STAT1 axis.
Blockade of Type I Interferon Signaling Ameliorates Oxidative Stress-Induced Pathology Next, we investigated whether the pharmacological blockade of the IFN-I signaling pathway has a beneficial effect on the virusinduced oxidative tissue damage. Antibody blockade of IFNAR1 abrogated the virus-induced generation of ROS in hepatocytes and macrophages in vitro ( Figure 7A ), highlighting a broader relevance for IFN-I induced oxidative stress in different cell types. In line with these in vitro experiments, blockade of IFNAR1 prevented the early elevation of ALT ( Figures 7B and 7D ) and decreased the expression of Atf3 mRNA in Sod1 À/À and WT mice upon LCMV infection ( Figures 7C and 7E) .
To investigate the long-term effects of transient blockade of IFNAR1, we administered the IFNAR1-specific antibody on day À1, 0, and 1 after infection as performed previously and monitored the course of chronic viral infection for 30 days. The blockade of IFNAR1 resulted in increased viremia in the early phase of infection ( Figure S5A ), but within 12 days the viral loads in the blood decreased to levels found in mice that had not received the blocking antibody. In line with this, comparable viral loads were found in organs 30 days after infection ( Figure S5B ). As shown previously in Figure 7 , the blockade of IFNAR1 resulted in protection from early hepatitis, yet it subsequently led to exacerbated concentrations of ALT 12 days after infection, coinciding with improved virus control that was likely driven by T cells (Figure S5C ) (Teijaro et al., 2013; Wilson et al., 2013) . The transient blockade of IFNAR1 did not affect the increased expression of Col1a1 mRNA in the liver tissue of infected Sod1 À/À mice on day 30 ( Figure S5D ), suggesting that early IFN-I signaling might be insufficient to drive late liver pathology. The increased Col1a1 levels correlated with elevated Ifit1 expression in the liver tissue of Sod1 À/À mice ( Figure S5E) , which might indicate a contributive role of sustained IFN-I signaling to the observed fibrotic processes. Together, these results reveal an early tissue-protective effect for the blockade of IFNAR1 and highlight the role of IFN-I in driving oxidative liver damage induced by viral infections both in Sod1 À/À and in WT mice.
These findings demonstrate that (1) SOD1 is essential in protecting hepatocytes from virus-induced damage, (2) IFN-I decreases the expression of SOD1, (3) IFN-I is necessary and sufficient to promote oxidative damage in the liver, and (4) blockade of IFN-I signaling protects from virus-induced oxidative liver damage. This functional circuit of IFN-I, SOD1, and oxidative stress provides mechanistic insights into the inflammatory and tissuedamaging processes in the liver upon viral infection, as well as a deeper understanding of the role of oxidative stress in viral .7 macrophages and primary hepatocytes from WT mice were infected with LCMV (MOI 5) and co-treated with 20 mg/ml blocking antibody a-IFNAR1 or isotype control. 24 hr later cells were stained with CellROX. Scale bar represents 20 mm. Representative images are shown. Quantification was performed by CellProfiler and numbers represent mean ± SEM. The group of unstimulated hepatocytes is the same as used for Figure 5E . One out of R two similar experiments is shown. (B) WT mice respectively Sod1 À/À mice, which received either isotype control or a-IFNAR1 blocking antibody, were infected with LCMV. Serum kinetics of ALT was measured (n = 4 mice per group). One out of R two similar experiments is shown. (C) Atf3 mRNA in the liver was measured 72 hr after LCMV infection from mice treated as described in (B). (D) WT mice received either isotype control or a-IFNAR1 blocking antibody and were infected with LCMV. Serum kinetics of ALT was measured (n = 9 or 10 mice pooled from two experiments). (E) Atf3 mRNA in the liver was measured 45 hr after LCMV infection from mice treated as described in (D). Statistical significance was calculated by one-way (A and C) or by two-way ANOVA (B and D) with Bonferroni correction and (E) with unpaired t test. Symbols and bars represent the mean ± SEM. hepatitis. Our data suggest a similar role for IFN-dependent processes occurring in human infections with hepatotropic and nonhepatotropic viruses, which can also result in clinically apparent liver injury (Lalazar, 2014) . The observed SOD1-dependent pathology appeared to be localized predominantly to the liver, which might be due to its delicate redox status as the major organ for iron transport and storage resulting in the production of large amounts of ROS (Crichton et al., 2002) .
Our study shows that the expression of SOD1 is downregulated by IFN-I signaling during viral infection and that loss of SOD1 results in oxidative damage in the liver. Together with similar observations of SOD1 downregulation in viral hepatitis in man (Diamond et al., 2012; Dillon et al., 2013; Kim et al., 2003; Levent et al., 2006; Megger et al., 2013) , this implies a likely role for SOD1 in virus-driven liver pathogenesis. The molecular mechanism of how IFN-I signaling induces downregulation of Sod1 needs further investigations and is expected to involve post-translational regulation of transcription factors such as NF-kB, AP-1, and SP1, which bind to the Sod1 promoter (Chang and Hung, 2012; Miao and St Clair, 2009; Radaeva et al., 2002; von Marschall et al., 2003) .
Liver fibrosis in chronic hepatitis C patients was found to be associated with elevated endogenous IFN-I signatures (Biè che et al., 2005; Sarasin-Filipowicz et al., 2008) and increased oxidative stress (Parola and Robino, 2001; Sá nchez-Valle et al., 2012) , which correlates with the data of our study. Yet, the LCMV model might not recapitulate all features of chronic liver fibrosis seen in humans, and studies with other models and/or patient samples will be required to provide further insights into the contribution of SOD1 in disease pathogenesis.
It remains to be determined whether there is a benefit to the host or whether, alternatively, the pathogen-induced oxidative stress represents simply a metabolic by-product of the IFN-I driven response. We speculate that this process might bear relevance for the metabolic rewiring of the cell, whereby the IFN-I driven transient changes in the redox status contribute to the rapidly changing bioenergetic and signaling demands as part of the antiviral state and/or of mechanisms of disease tolerance (Everts et al., 2014; Medzhitov et al., 2012; Pantel et al., 2014; Schieber and Chandel, 2014; Weinberg et al., 2015) . The molecular understanding of such crosstalk between metabolic and inflammatory processes might also contribute to a better understanding of the mechanism(s) of action and side effects of IFN-I therapies in non-infectious diseases like multiple sclerosis and cancer (Reder and Feng, 2014; Sistigu et al., 2014) .
Insights into this innate immunity-driven immunopathology provide a paradigm for infection-associated tissue damage by uncovering the redox system as a crucial effector downstream of the IFN-driven innate immune response. This establishes a molecular connection between cellular homeostasis, metabolism, and tissue damage in the context of viral infection and adds to the ongoing efforts to understand the pleiotropic antiviral and immunomodulatory effects of IFN-I (McNab et al., 2015; Schoggins et al., 2011; Teijaro et al., 2013; Wilson et al., 2013) . Administration of targeted antioxidants and/or transient blockade of IFN-I signaling might bear liver-protective potential in the context of IFN-I responses in infectious and inflammatory diseases. (Kamphuis et al., 2006) , Ifnar1 À/À (Mü ller et al., 1994) , Prf1 À/À (Kä gi et al., 1994) , Sod1 À/À (Matzuk et al., 1998) , Sod2 +/À (Lebovitz et al., 1996) , Sod3 À/À (Carlsson et al., 1995) , Stat1 À/À (Durbin et al., 1996) , Tcrb À/À (Mombaerts et al., 1992 ) (all on a C57BL/6J genetic background), and C57BL/6J mice were bred under specific pathogen-free conditions at the Institute for Molecular Biotechnology of the Austrian Academy of Sciences in Vienna, Austria, at the Charité animal facility in Berlin, Germany, and at the animal facility of the Max Planck Institute for Infection Biology in Berlin, Germany. Experiments were performed in individually ventilated cages at the Department for Biomedical Research of the Medical University of Vienna in Vienna, Austria, at the Charité animal facility in Berlin, Germany, and at the Institute of Immunobiology, Kantonal Hospital St. Gallen in St. Gallen, Switzerland, in compliance with the respective animal experiment licenses approved by the institutional ethical committees and the institutional guidelines.
For the generation of chimeric mice, bone marrow cells were obtained from respective donor mice by flushing the femur, tibia, and fibula bones with PBS/ BSA/EDTA. Recipient mice were subjected to a total irradiation of 11Gy using a Gammacell 40 B(U) (Nordion International Inc.). 1 3 10 7 bone marrow cells from the respective donor were transferred to the recipient mice 1 day post irradiation. 4 weeks following this procedure, the chimeric mice received 200 mg of anti-CD90 antibody intraperitoneally (i.p.) to deplete any remaining peripheral T cells from the recipient. Approximately 3 weeks later, the mice received intravenously 100 ml liposomal clodronate (clodronateliposomes. com) per 10 g of bodyweight to deplete any remaining macrophages from the recipient. These mice were taken in experiment 3 weeks later to allow repopulation of macrophages. No depletions were done for the chimeric experiments shown in Figure 6I .
As the standard LCMV protocol, we infected mice intravenously (i.v.) with 2 3 10 6 focus-forming units (FFU) of LCMV strain clone 13 . In addition, we infected mice with either 2 3 10 3 FFU (low dose) of strain clone 13 or 2 3 10 6 FFU of strain ARM . For experiments with the propagation-deficient vector ''rLCMV,'' we infected mice i.v. with 2 3 10 5 FFU of rLCMV/OVA . Infectious titers of LCMV were determined by focus-forming assay . For MHV experiments, mice were infected intraperitoneally with 1 3 10 3 PFU of strain A59 (Cervantes-Barragá n et al., 2009). MHV titers were determined by plaque assay (Cervantes- Barragan et al., 2007) . For VSV experiments, we infected mice i.v. with 2 3 10 6 PFU of strain Indiana. VSV titers were determined by plaque assay (Bonilla et al., 2002) .
Results are displayed as mean ± SEM and were statistically analyzed as detailed in the figure legends using GraphPad Prism version 5 or 6. Statistically significant p values were indicated as follows: * p % 0.05, ** p % 0.01, *** p % 0.001, **** p % 0.0001.
The raw data from our RNaseq data are deposited at ArrayExpress (http:// www.ebi.ac.uk/arrayexpress) with accession number E-MTAB-2351. Quantitative proteomic analysis in HCV-induced HCC reveals sets of proteins with potential significance for racial disparity. J. Transl. Med. 11, 239. Drakesmith, H., and Prentice, A. (2008) . Viral infection and iron metabolism. Nat. Rev. Microbiol. 6, 541-552. Durbin, J.E., Hackenmiller, R., Simon, M.C., and Levy, D.E. (1996) . Targeted disruption of the mouse Stat1 gene results in compromised innate immunity to viral disease. Cell 84, 443-450.
Everts, B., Amiel, E., Huang, S.C., Smith, A.M., Chang, C.H., Lam, W.Y., Redmann, V., Freitas, T.C., Blagih, J., van der Windt, G.J., et al. (2014) . TLR-driven early glycolytic reprogramming via the kinases TBK1-IKKε supports the anabolic demands of dendritic cell activation. Nat. Immunol. 15, 323-332. Flatz, L., Hegazy, A.N., Bergthaler, A., Verschoor, A., Claus, C., Fernandez, M., Gattinoni, L., Johnson, S., Kreppel, F., Kochanek, S., et al. (2010) . Development of replication-defective lymphocytic choriomeningitis virus vectors for the induction of potent CD8+ T cell immunity. Nat. Med. 16, 339-345. Gilchrist, M., Thorsson, V., Li, B., Rust, A.G., Korb, M., Roach, J.C., Kennedy, K., Hai, T., Bolouri, H., and Aderem, A. (2006) . Systems biology approaches identify ATF3 as a negative regulator of Toll-like receptor 4. Nature 441, 173-178. Guidotti, L.G., and Chisari, F.V. (2006) . Immunobiology and pathogenesis of viral hepatitis. Annu. Rev. Pathol. 1, 23-61.
Hoetzenecker, W., Echtenacher, B., Guenova, E., Hoetzenecker, K., Woelbing, F., Brü ck, J., Teske, A., Valtcheva, N., Fuchs, K., Kneilling, M., et al. (2012) . ROS-induced ATF3 causes susceptibility to secondary infections during sepsis-associated immunosuppression. Nat. Med. 18, 128-134. 
Activities of Alanine aminotransferase (ALT), aspartate aminotransferase (AST), alkaline phosphatase (AP), blood urea nitrogen and creatinine were analyzed using a Cobas C311 Analyzer (Roche) or a 747 Automatic-Analyzer (Hitachi).
Total RNA was extracted from cells or homogenized tissue lysates with QIAzol lysis reagent according to the manufacturer`s instructions (Qiagen). RNA was reverse transcribed to cDNA using random primers and the First Strand cDNA Synthesis Kit (Fermentas). Real-time PCR was performed with Taqman Fast Universal PCR Mastermix (Life Tech) using the Taqman GeneExpression Assays Atf3 (Mm00476032, Life Tech) and Sod1 (Mm01700393, Life Tech).
LCMV NP and EF1a were detected by corresponding probe and primer sets as described previously (Gilchrist et al., 2006; Pinschewer et al., 2010) . Expression values are expressed as ΔCt. The RNA-Seq data was processed by aligning the fastq files containing the read sequences to mouse genome (build mm9) using TopHat2. Relative fold changes were computed using Cuffdiff at an FDR of 0.05. Genes with a corrected P-value ≤ 0.05 and absolute robust Z score ≥ 1.5 were marked as differentially regulated genes. The raw data from our RNAseq data are deposited at ArrayExpress (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/arrayexpress/) with accession number E-MTAB-2351.
Enrichment for Gene Ontology -Biological Processes was carried out using DAVID analysis tool (david.abcc.ncifcrf.gov). Terms with a Benjamini-corrected p-value ≤ 0.01 were considered as significantly enriched processes. Genes involved in oxidation-reduction were clustered into 6 distinct groups using k-means clustering method implemented using TM4 Microarray Expression Viewer (www.tm4.org). The significantly differentially regulated genes shown in Figure 1D were selected based on an intersection with a published list of human genes with antioxidant function (Gelain et al., 2009) .
To detect ROS production, primary mouse hepatocytes were seeded on cover slips pre-coated with collagen and RAW264.7 macrophages were seeded on Chamber Slides Lab-Tek II (Thermo Scientific). Hoechst 33258 for 7 min. Finally, the coverslips were mounted onto microscopy slides using Fluoro Mounting Medium. Quantification of immunofluorescence images with CellROX was performed based on the mean fluorescence intensity of cytoplasmic area defined by the distance from the nuclei using the CellProfiler cell image analysis software v2.0 (Carpenter et al., 2006) . The size range for the pipelines was adjusted depending on the cell type.
Tissue specimens (liver) were fixed (12-48 hours at 4 °C) with 4% formaldehyde and subsequently embedded in paraffin as described previously . Microtome sections (3 µm thick) were stained with Hematoxylin and Eosin or prepared for immunohistochemistry as follows: Endogenous peroxidases (PBS/3% H 2 O 2 ) were neutralized and unspecific binding blocked (PBS/10% FCS). Sections were stained with primary antibodies: rabbit α-Phospho-STAT1 (detecting only phosphorylated STAT1 at position Tyrosine 701; Cell Signaling #9167), rabbit α-cleaved caspase 3 (BD Pharmingen or Cell Signalling) and mouse α-8-oxoguanine (8-oxoG) (Millipore, MAB3560) (Kitada et al., 2001) antibody. Bound primary antibodies were visualized using ready-to-use, peroxidase-based EnVision™ (Dako) secondary detection system with 3,3′-diaminobenzidine (DAB) as chromogen (haemalaun counterstaining of nuclei). Immunostained sections were registered using the slide scanner Pannoramic 250 Flash (3DHistech) at 200x magnification.
Immunostained liver sections were quantified using Tissue Studio 3 software (Definiens AG, Munich, Germany). DAB positive structures were expressed as cells/nuclei per mm 2 . Phospho-STAT1 stained sections were scanned using panoramic 250 flash slide scanner (3D Histech Ltd, Hungary). Phospho-STAT1 positive nuclei in the liver were quantified using Definiens Tissue Studio® 3 software (Definiens AG, Munich, Germany) and detected nuclei were expressed as cells per mm 2 .
For fibrosis stainings, 1-2 µm paraffin sections of livers were de-waxed, hydrated and stained for one hour at room temperature with Sirius Red (Polyscience, USA) and picric acid (Merck, Darmstadt). Sections were washed in acidified water (0.01N HCl), dehydrated, cleared in xylol (Roth, Karlsruhe) and mounted with corbit balsam (Hecht, Kiel). Additionally, liver sections were stained for elastic fibres with Elastica van Gieson staining kit (Merck, Darmstadt) according to manufacturer´s instructions. Nuclei appear black, elastic fibres purple and collagen red. Images were acquired using an AxioImager Z1 microscope (Carl Zeiss MicroImaging, Inc., Jena, Germany). For quantification of collagen content, five high power fields (hpf; 0.237 mm 2 ) per section were analysed using the module AutMess (Carl Zeiss MicroImaging, Inc.).
Histo-pathological scoring for MHV infection was performed evaluating the following criteria: i) lobular area inflammation (0 no infiltrating cells, 1 <100 infiltrating cells, 2 >100 infiltrating cells, 3 > 300 infiltrating cells), ii) lobular disarray and hepatocyte ballooning (0 nil, 1 <60%, 2 >60%) and iii) hepatocyte death (0 nil, 1 <20, 2 >20 cells).
Protein concentration of liver lysates were determined by Coomassie Protein Assay (Thermo Scientific). Proteins were analyzed by SDS-Page using NuPAGE® Novex 4-12% Bis-Tris Gels (Life Tech), Westran® Clear signal PVDF membranes (Whatman) and the following antibodies: anti-SOD1 (Abcam #ab16831) and anti-ACTIN (Sigma #A2066). The protein size was determined with the PageRuler TM Prestained Protein Ladder (Thermo Scientific). For protein quantification, the secondary antibody donkey anti-rabbit IgG-IRDye800 (Rockland, #611-732-128) was used. The bands were quantified on an Odyssey Imager (model #9120, LI-COR) using the software Image Studio v3.1 (LI-COR).
For detection of IFNα, sera were 1:10 prediluted and analysed by ELISA using rat α-mIFN-α capture antibody (PBL Interferon Source 22100-1), rabbit α-mIFN-α detection antibody (PBL Interferon Source 32100-1), α-rabbit HRP secondary antibody (Jackson ImmunoResearch 711-036-152) and TMB solution (Life Tech 002023).
Primary hepatocytes were isolated from anesthetized mice (Ketamine/Xylazine: 1:3, 0.1 ml/10 g mouse) upon perfusion via the portal vein with washing buffer followed by digestion of the liver using liberase (Roche). Next, the liver was detached and put in a petridish containing liberase buffer. Cells were shaken out of the liver, filtered using a 70 µm cell strainer (BD Falcon) and suspended in William's E Medium GlutaMAX™ (Invitrogen) containing 10 % FCS and 1 % PSQ. The cells were allowed to settle for 20 min on ice, before the upper 25 ml containing dead cells and debris were discarded. The remaining 25 ml were spun down for 10 min at 500 rpm at 4 °C. The pellet was washed in William`s E Medium/10 % FCS/1 % PSQ and centrifuged at 500 rpm for 3 min. Finally, cells were resuspended in William`s E Medium/10 % FCS/1 % PSQ and seeded at a density of 0.75-1x10 6 cells/well on 6-well plates precoated with 50 mg/l rat tail collagen type I (BD, Cat. No. 354236) containing 8.3 % glacial acetic acid (Merck, Cat. No. 1000632500) . After 3 h the medium was changed to Will E/0.5 % FCS/1 % PSQ and maintained in this medium.
Single cell suspensions of lymphoid and nonlymphoid organs were prepared by mechanical disruption. Lymphocytes were purified using Histopaque 1083 (Sigma-Aldrich) and density centrifugation (400 g at 20°C for 30 min). To prevent unspecific binding of mAb, 50 µg/ml of purified mouse and rat IgG were added to the staining mixture (Jackson Immunoresearch).
Dead cells were excluded using fixable viability dye eFluor 780 (eBioscience). Subsequently, the cells were stained with the following mAbs in PBS containing 0.2% BSA and 2 mM EDTA:
α-CD45 (30-F11), α-CD8a (53-6.7), α-CD11c (N418), α-F4/80 (BM8), α-MHCII (M5/114.15.2), α-NK1.1 (PK136), α-PDCA-1 (eBio927) and α-TCRβ (H57-597) were from eBioscience; α-CD45.1 (A20), α-CD45.2 (104), α-CD4 (RM4-5), α-Ly6G (1A8) and α-Ly6C (HK1.4) were from BioLegend. α-CD11b (M1/70) and α-siglec-F (E50-2440) were from BD Bioscience. Samples were acquired on a FACS LSR Fortessa or FACSCanto II (Becton Dickinson), data was analyzed with FlowJo (Tree Star).
Cells were treated in vitro with 10µM Copper (II) 3,5-diisopropylsalicylate hydrate (CuDIPS) (Sigma Aldrich, Cat. No. 341649) (Laurent et al., 2004) . Mice were administered i.p. with 10mg of CuDIPS per kg body weight one day before infection, and received two additional shots of 10mg/kg each at zero and one day after infection. Mice were administered 100ng recombinant mouse IFN-α4 i.v. (PBL Interferon Source 12115-1).
To neutralize type I IFN signaling, 250µg of α-IFNAR1 antibody (clone MAR1-5A3, BioXCell) was administered i.p. one day prior to infection with two additional shots of 250µg each at zero and one day after infection. The control group was administered with a matched isotype control (clone MOPC21, BioXCell). Natural Killer ( 
-/-WT n.s. 
Blood 
Ly6G + CD11b + mPDCA-1 + CD11c + Ly6C hi CD11b + Siglec-F -Ly6G - Tables   Table S1 (related to Figures 1 
Transcriptional analysis of liver tissue of Sod1 -/and WT mice 0, 16 or 42 hours after infection with LCMV (n = 3 mice per group).
Table S2 (related to Figure 1 ): K-means clustering of oxidation-reduction genes.
List of K-means clustering of oxidation-reduction related genes derived from RNAseq of liver tissue of Sod1 -/and WT mice (Table S1 ) after infection with LCMV.