Supplementary Figure 1. MERS-CoV pseudovirus utilizes human DPP4 to transduce target cells. (a) DPP4 expression on the cell surface. Huh7.5 cells (left panel), DPP4-untransfected HEK 293 cells (middle panel), and DPP4-transfected HEK 293 cells (right panel) were stained with goat anti-DPP4 antibody (in blue) and control antibody (in red) and analyzed by flow cytometry. (b) Transduction of DPP4-expressing cells by pseudotyped MERS-CoV England1 virus. Huh7.5 and HEK 293 cells without and with DPP4-transfection (in grey and black bars) were transduced by MERS-CoV pseudotyped virus. Relative expression of luciferase activity was measured (CPS). Untransfected and untransduced cells were used as the background control (open bars). Each bar represents the mean of triplicate assays with standard errors. One representative of two experiments is shown. (c) Transduction of Huh7.5 cells by MERS-CoV pseudovirus was blocked by soluble human DPP4 (sDPP4). MERS-CoV England1 pseudovirus was incubated with soluble human DPP4 before transduction of Huh7.5 cells. Relative luciferase activity (CPS) is shown. (d) Transduction of Huh7.5 cells by MERS-CoV pseudovirus was blocked by anti-DPP4, but not anti-ACE2 antibody. Huh7.5 cells were incubated with anti-DPP4 or anti-ACE2 polyclonal antibodies and then transduced with MERS-CoV England1 pseudovirus. Relative luciferase activity (CPS) is shown. Each data point in (c) and (d) represents the mean of triplicate assays with standard errors. One representative of two repeated experiments is shown.
A schematic representation of MERS-CoV S protein is shown with the N-terminal domain (NTD) highlighted in yellow, receptor binding domain (RBD) in pink, heptad repeats 1 and 2 (HR1 and HR2) in blue, and transmembrane domain (TM) in green. Eight MERS-CoV S sequences published in GenBank were aligned with the England1 strain. The amino acid differences are shown in red with the England1 strain as the referent. Phylogenetic distance between strains is represented by branch length on the phylogenetic tree to the left of the sequences.
Eight groups of mice (fiver per group) were immunized as indicated in Figure 1 . Neutralizing antibodies from sera five weeks after last vaccine boost were measured by a pseudovirus neutralization assay (black bars) and live virus micro-neutralization assay (open bars) to MERS-CoV JordanN3 respectively. Each black bar represents the mean of triplicate assays with standard errors. Each open bar represents a single assay. Figure 4 . MERS-CoV S DNA immunization induced antibody binding to both S1 and S2. (a, b) Schematic representation of MERS-CoV Spike DNA and protein constructs used for cell adsorption assays. (c) Sera from mice immunized with MERS-CoV S DNA, primed with S DNA and boosted with S1 protein plus Ribi adjuvant, or primed and boosted with S1 protein plus Ribi adjuvant were assayed by flow cytometry for their binding to cell surface-expressed MERS-CoV Spike proteins. HEK 293T cells transfected with MERS-CoV S, RBD-HATM, S1-TM and S2-TM were incubated with sera from the three immunization groups (1:200 dilution) and then stained with anti-mouse PE conjugate. One representative of three repeated experiments is shown. Red and blue lines indicate untransfected or anchored-S, RBD-TM, S1-TM and S2-TM transfected cells (as labeled on the top of the figure) stained with the sera labeled at the right. S: Spike glycoprotein, RBD: receptor binding domain, HA: hemagglutinin, TM: transmembrane. Figure 5 . MERS-CoV S DNA/S1 protein prime-boost vaccination induced a Th1-biased IgG response compared to a Th2-biased response elicited by a S1 protein prime-boost regimen. (a) Sera from mice (5 per group) immunized with MERS-CoV S DNA, primed with S DNA and boosted with S1 protein plus Ribi adjuvant, or primed and boosted with S1 protein plus Ribi adjuvant were assayed, by ELISA, for their predominance of MERS-CoV S1-specific IgG1 and IgG2a antibody responses. Open and black circles represent IgG2a and IgG1 antibody titers (Geometric mean titer (GMT) with 95%CI), respectively. One of two repeated experiments is shown. (b) The GMT ratios of IgG2a to IgG1 in the three groups were calculated from the left panel. Figure 6 . Identification of monoclonal antibodies against the MERS-CoV Spike glycoprotein. Immunized mice in both DNA and protein vaccine groups had their spleens harvested three days after an additional S1 protein.
Splenocytes were then fused with Sp2/0 myeloma cells to generate hybridomas that underwent three rounds of screening for binding to the S1, RBD, and S2 domains. The final round of screens generated 45 subclones. Supernatant from the subclones culture were subjected to neutralization and binding tests. Percentage of neutralization against pseudoviruses of Eng1 strain from the subclones was determined and is shown highlighted from high (red > 90%) to low (green < 1%). Supernatants from the subclones were assessed for binding to the RBDs, S1 and S-TM proteins. OD450nm values are indicated for strong binding (red, > 3) to weak binding (green, < 1). Western blot analysis was done to assess whether the subclones can recognize denatured S linear eptitopes. Based on the ELISA binding data, the mAbs were classified into three groups: RBD specific, S1 specific (non-RBD) and S2 specific as indicated. Four of these mAbs (D12, F11, G2 and G4) were selected for additional characterization based on their antigenic specificity and high neutralization potency. Figure 7 . Octet Biosensorgrams of MERS-CoV S1, RBD, S2 molecules binding to vaccine-induced mouse monoclonal IgGs. Mouse monoclonal antibodies were loaded onto AMC probes and association with MERS-CoV antigen was allowed to proceed for 300 s, followed by dissociation for 300 s with the responses measured in nm using an Octet Red 384 machine. The S2 binding to G4 was measured by loading human-Fc-S2 onto AHC probes and measuring association with varying concentrations of G4 Fab. The solid black lines represent the best fit of the kinetic data to a 1:1 binding model. All experiments were carried out, in triplicate, at 30°C in PBS buffer (pH 7.4) supplemented with 1% BSA to minimize non-specific binding. The dotted line indicates the beginning of dissociation and the legend indicates the MERS CoV antigen and G4 Fab concentrations used. Supplementary Figure 11 . Assessment of D12 and F11 interactions with MERS CoV RBD. (a) D12 and F11 directly block RBD binding to DPP4. Mouse monoclonal antibodies D12 and F11 were loaded onto AMC probes for 300 s and association with MERS-CoV RBD was allowed to proceed for 300 s, followed by incubation with soluble DPP4 for 300 s with the responses measured in nm using an Octet Red 384 machine. (b) Multiple neutralizing epitopes are accessible on MERS CoV RBD. MERS CoV RBD was loaded onto anti-penta-His probes for 300 s followed by sequential binding of both D12 and F11 mAbs. (c) Soluble DPP4 prevents binding of RBD to D12 and F11 mAbs. MERS CoV RBD was loaded onto anti-penta-His probes for 300 s followed by sequential binding of DPP4 and either D12 or F11 mAbs. All experiments were carried out at 30°C in PBS buffer (pH 7.4) supplemented with 1% BSA to minimize non-specific binding. The dotted line indicates the beginning of incubation with the second and third ligand in each of the experiments.
(a) SARS receptor binding domain (RBD) (violet) with the receptor binding motif (RBM) (orange) and the ACE2 receptor (green) are shown in cartoon representation. The ACE2 interacting region is mapped onto the SARS RBD (surface representation, rotated) and colored in green. The RBD region that interacts with the ACE2 glycan is shown in yellow. (b-d) SARS RBD and M396 Fab 1,2 , F26G19 Fab 3 and 80R Fv 4 are shown in cartoon representation. The antibody interacting region is mapped onto the RBD and colored green (Light chain) and blue (Heavy chain).
Serial dilutions of mixed NHP sera from three vaccinated groups were tested in competition with biotinylated monoclonal antibodies F11, D12, G2, G4 for binding to MERS-CoV S1 or S-dTM (for mAb G4). Percent inhibition is shown. (a-c) Unvaccinated NHPs (a) and those vaccinated with S DNA/S1 protein (b) or S1 protein/S1 protein (c) underwent chest CT imaging before virus challenge and days 3, 6, 9, and 14 (not shown) post-challenge. Two dimensional coronal CT images and three dimensional reconstructions showed larger volumes of percent abnormal lung (infiltrate, consolidation, ground glass opacity) in the unvaccinated compared to vaccinated NHPs. (a-c) Unvaccinated NHPs (a) and those vaccinated with S DNA/S1 protein (b) or S1 protein/S1 protein (c) underwent chest CT imaging before virus challenge and days 3, 6, 9, and 14 (not shown) post-challenge. Two dimensional coronal CT images and three dimensional reconstructions showed larger volumes of percent abnormal lung (infiltrate, consolidation, ground glass opacity) in the unvaccinated compared to vaccinated NHPs. (a-c) Unvaccinated NHPs (a) and those vaccinated with S DNA/S1 protein (b) or S1 protein/S1 protein (c) underwent chest CT imaging before virus challenge and days 3, 6, 9, and 14 (not shown) post-challenge. Two dimensional coronal CT images and three dimensional reconstructions showed larger volumes of percent abnormal lung (infiltrate, consolidation, ground glass opacity) in the unvaccinated compared to vaccinated NHPs. 