One of the significant transmission routes of EVD is known to be the infection of medical staff who have frequent contact with patients, and the transmission by the infected staff. Therefore, this study divided the entire population into a healthcare worker (HCW) group and the community (C) group to consider the heterogeneity of. After dividing the population into the HCW and C groups, each group was subdivided into the Susceptible (S), Exposed (E), Infectious (I), Hospitalized (J), Isolationtreated (Q), and Recovered (R) groups. During the isolated treatment period following the confirmed diagnosis, it is assumed that no spread of infection would occur. Since the J and R groups in the HCW and C groups have the same behavioral patterns, contact rates, and rates of transmission, they were not divided further into medical and non-medical groups. Figure 1 shows the flow of spread of EVD, and light blue color was used to demarcate the areas of the hospitals from the local community.
To establish the mathematical model of Korean EVD, the Western African EVD epidemic model (refer to supplemental data) from the 2014 Sierra Leone data was modified to fit the circumstances of the Korean healthcare system. Firstly, unlike Western Africa, where infection from the funeral customs was an important route for spreading, it was assumed that the Korean healthcare environment would not lead to infection through contact with the bodies of the deceased. In addition, all patients with EVD symptoms were assumed to be hospitalized and isolated. The duration from the day of onset of EVD symptoms to the day of hospitalization and isolation periods was set with reference to cases imported into the USA. Table   1 . The rate of transmission of infection ( ) is estimated by using the WHO report of new EVD case data for Sierra Leone at the time of the 2014 Western African EVD. EVD epidemic data were estimated by comparing data from the WHO's weekly accumulating patient number and that of the model from corresponding dates. It was also based on rates of transmission of infection that minimize the squared difference between the number of new cases from the data and from the model estimation, using the least square fitting method [2] . In parameter estimation, the direction of spread between the community and healthcare worker groups was not considered. In other words,
The details for estimating the rate of EVD spread using the Sierra Leone data are The first imported patient is assumed to be one from the latent patients in the community ( (0) = 1). 1/ Period of isolation to recovery 14 days [4] [5] [6] In the mathematical model of EVD infection transmission, the basic reproductive number of EVD infections ( 0 ) calculated by the Next-generation method is as follows [9] . Here, and refer to the community and healthcare worker population, respectively.
The basic reproductive number of infection ( 0 ), when calculated based on I, was 2.42 before the activation of interim policy, which decreases to 0.76 following the policy. In case of delay in diagnosis scenario ( II), a delay of 3 days (6 days) causes the first case patient to show the basic reproductive number of 4.05 (6.05) which is higher than the previous value of 2.42. Besides, if the duration between confirmation of diagnosis and isolation is shortened from the previous mean of 2 days to 6 hours, it was shown that the basic reproductive number is estimated to be 0.99, which is less than 1, even without activation of the interim policy.
Based on the mathematical model of the domestic spread of EVD transmission, estimates of possible number of patients and duration of outbreak for each corresponding response scenario for domestic imported cases of EVD were made with the Gillespie algorithm, which is a stochastic model simulation that is run by units of individual events [10] . In this study, outbreak duration is defined as the time from arrival of the first patient to recovery of the last patient. In the stochastic simulation by the Gillespie algorithm, the duration between events is inversely related to the sum of propensity related to infection, hospitalization, isolation, and recovery. The propensity of each event is listed in Table 2 .
Transitions Propensity
Using the partial rank correlation coefficient (PRCC), we have analyzed the effects of changes in parameters in the mathematical model on model outcome [11] . In this study, the rate of transmission of infection ( , , , ), duration of symptom onset to hospitalization (1/ , 1/ ), and duration from confirmed diagnosis of hospitalized patient to isolation (1/δ) were set as variables, and subsequently, the number of secondary infection cases during the transmission period were set as a function of the corresponding variable. In the analysis of susceptibility, the cases of delay in diagnosis and missed imported patients were not considered. In the process of calculating PRCC, in order to perform Latin hypercube sampling of the combined variables applied to the model, the distribution of each variable is assumed to follow a uniform distribution within 0.5-2 times that of the mean values used in the simulation. Table 3 shows the values of PRCC and p (2,000 trials of simulation performed).
It could be confirmed from the PRCC results that the number of secondary infection cases was most sensitive to the rate of transmission of infection of hospitalized patients against healthcare workers and the duration of confirmed diagnosis and isolation among hospitalized patients. Furthermore, the rate of transmission between healthcare workers did not significantly affect the number of secondary infected patients, as shown by the high p values of the PRCC results. 