To evaluate the 84 OIE pathogens ability to infect swine (wild and domestic), cattle, sheep, goats, equine, poultry, cervids (North American deer and elk species only), and humans we used a two-step process.
First, for each of the 84 pathogens we used three references texts, Diseases of Swine (Zimmerman et al. 2012 ), Infectious Diseases of Livestock (Coetzer et al. 2004) , and Infectious Diseases of Wild Mammals (Williams and Barker 2008) to determine well-established host susceptibility using our a-priori susceptibility categories for each of the eight hosts. Second, pathogen-host combinations with susceptibilities that were identified as other than clinical or sub-clinical were then investigated using the peer-reviewed literature that included both edited book volumes and scientific journals.
To implement the second search of the peer-reviewed literature we used a combination of search terms for the scientific and common names of both hosts (Table S1 ) and pathogens (Table S2) 
Data describing the current status of OIE listed pathogens in wild pigs in North America, was generated using a method to sample from the scientific literature. Our approach is based on PRISMA (Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses) method of systematic literature review ). However our objective was not to identify all papers reporting pathogen findings but rather to generate a representative sample that could be used to determine pathogens that have existing surveillance studies. To implement this sampling we identified keywords to search three databases (PubMed, Scopus, and Web of Science) for papers reporting surveillance results, or case reports for any pathogen or disease in wild pigs in North America. In order for an article to be included the paper must have contained the terms from Table S3 in the title, key words or abstract. All scientific peer reviewed literature from Journals and edited book volumes describing any wild pig pathogens in North America was considered eligible. We excluded so called 'gray literature' such as government reports, technical documents or other similar documents. These documents, while potentially containing valuable data, could not be sampled effectively using our approach and may have biased our findings. In addition, the results from many of these documents likely had corresponding peer review papers.
Once all relevant sources were identified and retrieved, we reviewed each title and abstract to ensure the paper was reporting pathogen or disease findings in wild pigs in Mexico, Canada, or the United States.
Our initial search identified 3,637 papers and after removal of duplicates and eligibility screening 142 papers were reviewed in detail resulting in the identification of 72 surveillance studies that were included in our study ( Figure S1 ). The resulting papers were assumed to be a representative sample of the literature and represent the known status of pathogens in wild pigs in North America. Figure S1 . Results of systematic sampling of scientific literature. 