study participants from the Stockholm (Sweden) area entered the baseline step of the ILI study in the context of the Swedish national LifeGene project 1 .
vaccine containing A/ H1N1/California/7/2009 (adjuvanted with ASO3, i.e. DL-α-tocopherol, vitamin E; squalene and polysorbate).
All participants in the study were provided four Σ-VIROCULT swabs and transport media vials (MW950S, Medical Wire and Equipment, Wiltshire, England) during the first blood draw and instructions on how to use the nasal swab. If study participants experienced ILI symptoms, they took a nasal swab and posted the material which was tested for 22 viral targets (Supplementary Table S1) as described in detail 2 .
The swab samples received were blended in the transport medium by vortexing and 400µL of this blend was used to extract viral nucleic acid. Nucleic acid extraction was performed according to supplier's instructions on EZ1 Biorobot (Qiagen Inc. Hilden, Germany) using EZ1 Virus mini kit v2.0 (Qiagen Inc.) and final elution volume of 60µL.
Virus specific nucleic acid detection was performed using a multiplex kit from Beckman Coulter (Miami, USA) as described in detail 2 . This panel covered 11 different serotypes of Influenza virus and 11 viral serotypes among 6 viruses suspected to cause common upper respiratory tract infections (Supplementary Table S2 ). Target specific cDNA was synthesized using a reverse transcriptase primer plex kit and for the GenomeLab GeXP start kit (Beckman Coulter). Reverse transcription (RT) reaction was performed in 20µL reaction volume using 12µL of extracted nucleic acid, 4µL of GeXP 5X RT buffer, 2µL of RT primer plex and 1µL each of undiluted Kan-r and reverse transcriptase enzyme. The reaction was initiated at 48 o C for 1 minute followed by 42 o C for 60 minutes and terminated at 95 o C for 5 minutes; the synthesised cDNA was kept at 4 o C before using for PCR analysis. PCR reaction was performed in 20µL reaction volume using 9.3µL of synthesized cDNA, 4µL 5X PCR buffer, 4µL, 25mM MgCl 2 , 2µL PCR primer plex and 0.7µL of Thermo Start DNA polymerase (Thermo Scientific Inc. Fullerton, CA, USA). The PCR reaction was initiated at 95 o C for 5 minutes followed by 40 cycles of 94 o C for 30 seconds, 55 o C for 30 seconds and 70 o C for 1 minute. The PCR product was maintained at 4 o C prior to fragment analysis.
Fragment analysis was performed on a GenomeLab GeXP fragment analysis system (Beckman Coulter Inc.) 1µL of PCR product was dissolved in 39µL of sample loading solution and 400 bp DNA ladder was used as size reference. The Kan-r PCR fragment and RP DNA along with RP RNA PCR fragment were used as reaction control and sample control respectively. If control bands were absent, the analysis was repeated to rule out procedural errors. Viral target identification was performed using GenomeLab GexP fragment analysis software.
Once control bands were identified, the sample was subjected to further analysis based on the virusspecific size of the amplicon. In case of influenza A H1N1 09 ('swine flu') serotype, in addition to human housekeeping gene control fragments, the presence of the influenza A generic PCR fragment as well as the H1N1 general signal was required to mark a sample as positive for H1N1 RNA. The detected 'swine flu' positive samples were subjected to sequencing by cloning and subsequent sequencing for matrix (GU322021.1, NCBI), neuraminidase (GU361110.1, NCBI) and hemagglutinin (GU727573.1, NCBI) genes to confirm viral diagnosis. Supplementary Table S1 . 