We first sampled three central urban districts, then sampled a total of ten subdistricts within those three central urban districts, and from each of those ten subdistricts we sampled four neighborhoods (the smallest administrative unit in China, with a mean population of 3800 people per neighborhood sampled), using multi-stage stratified probability proportional to population size (PPS). At the district level, three districts were sampled from the total seven central urban districts of Shanghai by PPS (Huangpu, Xuhui, and Changning). At the subdistrict level, ten subdistricts within those three central urban districts were sampled by PPS, where the number of subdistricts needed per district was determined by proportionate stratification (four from Xuhui, three from Huangpu, and three from Changning). At the household level, 25 households per neighborhood were selected with the help of neighborhood committee cadres. The selection of households was encouraged to be broadly representative of the population of the neighborhood in terms of geographical spread.
Assumptions for the sample size calculation:
• 95% confidence, alpha equals 0.05.
• Sigma equals 6.78, referring to a published social contact survey in Hong Kong 1 , as Shanghai may have similar characteristics of high population density and connectivity to Hong Kong.
• Delta equals 0.6, a specified level of precision.
• 1 / 2 equals 25, based on our budget.
• equals 0.03, assuming equal ICC across clusters ( ̅ = ). There was no published data about ICC to be used in our social contact study, so we estimated it according to our pilot study results.
Based on the above assumptions, a total sample size of 894 was required.
Assuming that 90% of the participants would eventually return a completed survey, we need recruit approximately 1,000 participants for the study.
In this case, as b equaled 25, 25 households were needed per neighborhood, and thus forty neighborhoods were needed in total. Four neighborhoods were sampled per subdistrict, thus a total of ten subdistricts were required for the three central districts.
According to proportionate stratified PPS, we sampled four subdistricts in Xuhui, three in Changning and three for Huangpu.
Eight age groups were defined as 0-9, 10-19, 20-29, 30-39, 40-49, 50-59, 60-69, 70 years and above. Considering the final sample size of 1000, we aimed for each age group to contain 125 individuals. In addition, children and adolescents younger than 20 years old were oversampled because they were considered to be the main driver for transmission of many infectious respiratory diseases (as in 2 ). Table A showed the age distribution of the population of Shanghai (central urban districts) in 2017 (in which the total population size is about 7.3 million) compared with that in our sample. More practically, inclusion criteria for the study were 1) a Chinese person who had been living in Shanghai for longer than two weeks and did not intend to move from Shanghai in the following two weeks, 2) being able to move independently and understand clearly the content of our questionnaire, and 3) giving written individual informed consent (from a parent/guardian if participant was below 18 years of age).
Recall bias. In order to explore recall bias at the end of H-H section, we asked questions to assess participants' memory such as "How well do you recall your contacts today?". There were five options for selection, including "very well", "well", "moderately well", "not well" and "poorly". Additionally, participants were required to estimate approximately how many people they might have accidentally forgotten to include (Supplementary Text S12; questions 17-18.). This information is important to evaluate the quality of data collection.
Tips on filling in the questionnaire. If the same person was encountered several times during the assigned day, participants were instructed to only record him/her once, and to record the total time participants spent with that person over the entire day. Reporting a group contact involved reporting the total (approximate) size of the group and the age range of the majority in the group, rather than reporting each of these contacts individually. Participants could report only one group contact per survey (see Supplementary Text S12; questions 13-15.).
Who completed the questionnaire depended on the participant's age, 1) parentalproxy completion for 0 to 10, 2) completion by participant for 11 to 17 subject to parental informed consent, and 3) completion by participant for 18 or above. Fig. S5 B) .
The number of contact settings was estimated as the total number of different social setting in which contact was reported, where the maximum was defined by the settings categorization: home, school, work, transport, other public places and others (i.e. 6).
For the age of individual contacts, participants were asked to give the age range of their contacts or the exact age only if known or easily estimable; therefore, the exact age was unavailable for a proportion of contacts. To solve the issue, the exact age of contacts given as a range was assumed to be the mid-point of the given range. In order to determine the age of contacts for which there was no age information (2% of the age of contacts were completely missing), the age was sampled from all the contacts of participants of the same age group.
For the age of group contacts, participants did not record the exact age of each contact, so we modelled the distribution of individual contact age using Gaussian kernel function, stratified by different age groups of participants (0-35m, 3-6y, 7-19y, 20-39y, 40-59y, 60-75y, 76y and over) (rather than modelling the number of contacts made with each age group). Then we drew randomly from the model referring to the age group of participants and the age group of the group contacts selected in the questionnaire and repeated this process 200 times to estimate uncertainty (Supplementary Fig. S5 A).
In the models of the H-H contacts, specifically, log(1+ ), log(1+ ), log(1+ ), and log(1+ ) were defined as the response variables with negative binomial distributions, where is the number of total contacts reported by participant j from district i, is the number of individual contacts, is the total duration of contacts, and is the number of contact settings; the probability of reporting group contact was assumed with quasibinomial distribution. In order to assess the degree of age assortativity within the obtained human contact matrices, we calculated the q indices and the bootstrapped 95% confidence We used smooth of both age variables from tensor products, ensuring flexibility.
To allow for over dispersion in the number of contacts, we assumed that they are distributed according to a negative binomial distribution with mean mij, dispersion parameter , and variance + 2 ⁄ . We used the basis dimension =8 in order to be large enough to fit the data well, but small enough to keep the fitting procedure computationally efficient 4, 5 . Then, we chose the thin plate regression splines in order to avoid the selection of knots, and a log link function for the GAM. Finally, we accounted for the reciprocal nature of data and predicted the expected number of contacts at the population level.
We tested the null hypothesis that telephone interviewed respondents would report more contacts by computing the difference between human contact matrices from self-reporting and telephone interviewed respondents. Confidence intervals were obtained through bootstrapping, with replacement, a total of 1000 iterations.
The distribution of the number of individual contacts was right-skewed with a median 
We found a significant incremental linear association between the number of individual contacts and participant age. We found no significant association between the number of individual contacts and modes of data collection, but household size above 4 was associated with a greater number of individual contacts. The probability of reporting group contacts was significantly associated nonlinearly with participant age, with a similar relationship of contacts and participant age to the number of total contacts. Telephone interview was associated with a significantly greater probability of reporting group contacts than self-reporting. Workdays and higher population density were associated with a significantly greater probability of reporting contacts (Supplementary Fig. S14 and Supplementary Table S9 ).
For the individual contact matrix, we found stronger diagonals and clearer parallel secondary diagonals than that for total contacts, which was most pronounced in those aged above75 years. For group contacts, we found strong diagonals for participants aged below 20 years, more age-mixed patterns among 20-60 years, and dispersed pattern for those above 60-year-old. Compared to self-reporting, telephone interview had a more similar pattern with the overall matrix ( Supplementary Fig. S16 ).
The distribution of the number of animal contacts was right-skewed with a median of one animal. Children aged 3-6 years, especially females, had the highest number of animal contacts (Fig. 2 B1-B2) . The distribution of the animal contact duration was also right-skewed with a median of 0.62 hours. In those aged 20-74, animal contact duration was much longer in females than in males, but this was reversed in other age groups ( Fig. 2 C1-C2 ). Most frequently, participants had contact with one kind of animal, and amongst the animal species encountered, dogs still dominated (45.1%) ( Fig. 2 D1-D2) . Most of the animal contacts occurred in the home setting (81.6%).
Adults aged 60-75, especially females, more frequently had animal contact outside of the home (Fig. 2 E1-E3 ).
Supplementary Text S10: The evaluation of the quality of data collection 78% participants who chose self-reporting filled out the questionnaire on the day that was assigned to them, while 82.8% participants who chose telephone interview had completed the interview on the assigned day. The proportion of rating their own recall performance as "well" or "very well" was 89.6% and 95.3% respectively for selfreporting and telephone interview. For self-reporting, 11.1% participants reported not including all contacts, and the mean number of contacts that had been left out was 1.1.
For telephone interview, 10.9% participants reported not including all contacts, and the mean number of contacts left out was 0.8. To sum up, telephone interview participants rated the quality of their responses across a number of dimensions higher than self-reporting participants, although both of the different modes of data collection had a good quality of data collection (Supplementary Table S13 ).
We explored the age-specific incidence of infection during the initial phase of an epidemic of an emerging infectious disease agent that spreads in a completely susceptible population. We focused on the generic features of epidemic spread along the transmission route that was specified by physical and nonphysical contacts.
It is worth noting that the age distribution of cases during the early phase of the As the POLYMOD study suggested, in practice, the distribution of new cases is stable after five generations; that is, the distribution no longer depends on the precise age of the initial case. Hence, the incidence of new infections per age band at step 5 was obtained by dividing the expected number of new cases per age class by the number of individuals in each age class. To facilitate comparison among countries, we normalized the distribution of incidence over age classes such that the age-specific incidences summed to one.
Estimates obtained using the contact data from this study were compared with those of Hong Kong 1 , POLYMOD 2 , France 6 , and Peru 7 , using a similar approach to compute the mixing matrix. Additionally, estimates from assumed random mixing were also included. The contact matrices from different studies are displayed in Supplementary Fig. S23 , and the observed relative incidence was showed in Supplementary Fig. S24 .
We did notice different results using data collected by different interviewers, but we don't think it is entirely due to having different interviewers. The reason is that we did not randomly assign interviewers to call the people, but non-randomly assigned one interviewer to a sampled neighborhood including 25 participants. Thus, the different results derived from different interviewers might be confounded by neighborhoodlevel factors, such as age structure and population density of the neighborhood.
None the less, we did perform a sensitivity analysis using the data derived from telephone interview with four interviewers involved (i.e. "Interviewer A", "Interviewer B", "Interviewer C", "Interviewer D") (see below table A, table B Thank you for participating in our study "Social contact and travel survey in Shanghai City".
The questionnaire consists of 3 sections:
• Your demographic data, general household and travel information • Human-to-human contacts you have made during the assigned day • Human-to-animal contacts you have made during the assigned day I give permission to the investigators to contact me within 12 months for potential follow-up for this study. Please provide your information below. Before submitting the contact diary, please make sure you have not left out any contacts.
No, approximately how many people you have left out: __________________________________
Very well Well Moderate well Not well Poorly
1) Record in the contact diary every animal you have touched on your assigned day, regardless of whether the contact is long or short, and whether the animal belongs to you or not. 2) Animal ownership is defined as having at least one live animal in the household in which you are spending the majority of his/her time (i.e. living together in house). 3) Animal touching is defined as physical touching at least one living animal on the assigned day, irrespective of whether that animal belongs to the household.
Yes No (if no, please skip to Q9) 20. Please provide the details on the animals you own. 