In blue: comments regarding technical implementation and national application.
Question to be asked when adding another participant. For each additional person that a person registered this question should be asked.
If a person just registers and enters data for himself, then this question should not be asked.
If you are filling in the survey on behalf of someone else, then make sure that you have the consent of that person to do so Why are we asking this? Flu is thought to spread very effectively at home, so it's important to know which Flusurvey (or Influweb or Influensakoll or…) participants live in the same household.
A household member is defined as a someone (not necessarily related) who lives at the same address as you and who shares cooking facilities and a living room, sitting room or dining area.
What is your gender?
Why are we asking this? To find out whether the chance of getting flu is different between men and women.
What is your date of birth (month and year)?
Why are we asking this? The chance of getting flu and the risk of more serious complications vary by age.
Should be pre-filled for multiple users of a single account, if they're in the same household. This is the NL/UK version. For countries which have permission to collect the whole postcode then this should be re-worded, and the data collected to allow.
What is the first part of your home postal code?
XXXX / the whole post-code to be collected Why are we asking this? To check how representative our sample is, and to see whether the chance of getting of flu varies across the country.
How should I answer it? Please choose the first part of the post-code (the part before the space).
What is your main activity?
Paid employment, full-time Paid employment, part-time Self-employed (businessman, farmer, tradesman, etc) Attending daycare/school/college/university Home-maker (e.g. housewife) Unemployed Long-term sick-leave or parental leave Retired Other Why are we asking this? To check how representative our sample is compared to the population as a whole, and to find out whether the chance of getting flu is different for people in different types of occupation.
How should I answer it? Please tick the box that most closely resembles your main occupation. For pre-school children who don't go to daycare tick the "other" box.
If "Yes, Paid employment full time", or "Yes, paid employment part time" to Q4, or "Self-employed (businessman, farmer, tradesman, etc), or "Attending daycare/school/college/university" What is the first part of your school/college/workplace postal code (where you spend the majority of your working/studying time)?
XXXX I don't know/can't remember Not applicable (e.g. don't have a fixed workplace) Why are we asking this? To find out roughly how far you travel on a regular basis.
How should I answer it? Please choose the first part of the post-code (the part before the space).
If "Yes, Paid employment full time", or "Yes, paid employment part time" to Q4, or "Self-employed (businessman, farmer, tradesman, etc).
Trigger free text if "other" checked, allow the users to write in their occupation Which of the following descriptions most closely matches with your main occupation? Professional (e.g. manager, doctor, teacher, nurse, engineer) Office work (e.g. admin, finance assistant, receptionist, etc) Retail, sales, catering and hospitality and leisure (e.g. shop assistant, waiter, bar-staff, gym instructor etc) Skilled manual worker (e.g. mechanic, electrician, technician)
Other manual work (e.g. cleaning, security, driver) Other Why are we asking this? To check how representative our sample is compared to the population as a whole and to find out whether the chance of getting flu is different for people in different types of occupation.
Please tick the box that most closely resembles your main occupation. Intake Q4d (to be asked for those aged 16 and over) This is the UK version. The 2 nd bullet point is exams taken at the time of early school leaving (16 in the UK), the 3 rd bullet point for late school leaving (18 in the UK). The others are for degrees, or higher qualifications, which should be fairly comparable across Europe.
The questions that you should ask at the bullets 2 and 3, are related to exams taken at early and late school leaving ages.
What is the highest level of formal education qualification that you have?
If you are still in education, then please tick this box with the appropriate highest level that you have already achieved. How should I answer it? Please choose the box that represents your HIGHEST level of educational achievement. The different options roughly equate to:
No qualifications school-leaving exams at around 16 years of age school-leaving exams at around 18 years of age University degree, or equivalent professional qualification Higher degree or advanced professional qualification If you are an adult who is currently undergoing part-time training (e.g. night-school) then tick the box that represents your current highest level of education.
Needs to have a check so that participants can't give inconsistent answers o None of the above Why are we asking this?
To find out whether you are likely to be exposed to more flu than the average person (e.g. work with children, or patients)
How should I answer it?
Groups of people could include any setting where you come into contact with large numbers of people at once, e.g. a teacher who may contact many children in a day
This should be a table with the 1 st column being the age groups (as above), and the 2 nd column being numbers, 0,1,2,3,4,5+. It should be PRE-FILLED with zeros.
Preferably to be pre-filled for multiple users of a single account, if they're in the same household?
INCLUDING YOU, how many people in each of the following age groups live in your household? Members of larger households, or those with children, may be more likely to catch flu than others.
A household is defined as a group of people (not necessarily related) living at the same address who share cooking facilities and share a living room, sitting room or dining area.
Ideally, this question would only be asked if they have children aged 0-18 -or if they're aged 0-18 themselves, and the answer would be a drop-down menu with the right number of options.
Attending school or day-care may be a risk for acquiring flu and similar illnesses. We would like to check this.
If your child attends regular school or day-care (even if this is just one day a week) then please answer yes to this. Attendance of clubs and activities does not count -even if regular.
Walking Bike Motorbike/scooter Car Public transportation (bus, train, tube, etc) Other Why are we asking this?
It has been suggested that using public transport may be a risk for flu. We would like to check this.
Tick the option that best represents your most normal mode of transport.
On a normal day, how much time do you spend on public transport (bus, train, tube, etc)?
No time at all 0-30 minutes 30 minutes -1.5 hours 1.5 hours -4 hours Over 4 hours Why are we asking this?
It has been suggested that using public transport may be a risk for getting flu. We would like to check this.
Think of a typical day. If you use several different forms of public transport each day, remember to include all journeys. Don't include taxis or other forms of private transport.
Never Once or twice a year Between 3 and 5 times a year Between 6 and 10 times a year More than 10 times a year I don't know
Note that the years will need to be changed each year.
Yes No I don't know/can't remember Why are we asking this?
We would like to be able to work out how much protection the vaccine gives. We would also like to find out if there is some protection from vaccines received in previous years.
Answer yes if you received the vaccine last year (during the autumn/winter of 2011/2012
Note that the years will need to be changed each year.
Yes [go to questions Q10b and Q10c] No [go to question Q10d] I don't know/can't remember Why are we asking this?
We would like to be able to work out how much protection the vaccine gives.
Report yes, if you received the vaccine this season, usually in the autumn. If you get vaccinated after filling in this questionnaire, please return to this and update your answer.
Note that the years will need to be changed each year.
XX/XX/XXXX I don't know/can't remember Why are we asking this?
Knowing when people are vaccinated tells us how well the vaccination programme is being carried out.
Please try and answer as accurately as possible. If you do not know the precise date, please give your best estimate. For instance, you might remember the month, then try and remember if it was at the beginning or the end of the month. Were there any significant events (e.g. a holiday or a birthday) that might help jog your memory? Intake Q10c: (if "Yes" to Intake Q10, follow-up question)
Note that risk groups (option 1) are UK-specific and may need adjusting for other countries.
(Select all options that apply) We would like to know why some people get vaccinated and others do not
Tick all those reasons that were important in your decision.
Needs to have a check so that participants can't give inconsistent answers This question allows us to find out whether you have other medical conditions that may increase your risk of having more severe illness if you are infected with flu.
How should I answer it?
Only answer "yes" if you take regular medication for your medical problem. If, for instance, you only occasionally take an asthma inhaler, then do not answer "yes" for asthma.
Only asked of women between ages 15 and 50)
Yes [go to question Q12]
Don't know/would rather not answer Why are we asking this?
Pregnancy can result in more severe illness if you are infected with flu.
Answer yes if you are pregnant today.
Intake Q12b: (if "Yes" to Intake Q12, follow-up question) Which trimester of the pregnancy are you in?
First trimester (week 1-12)
Second trimester (week 13-28)
Third trimester (week 29-delivery) Don't know/would rather not answer Why are we asking this?
The stage of pregnancy might alter your risk of severe flu if you are infected, although this is not very clear.
Which trimester are you in today?
Do you smoke tobacco?
Yes, occasionally Yes, daily, fewer than 10 times a day Yes, daily, 10 or more times a day Don't know/would rather not answer Why are we asking this?
Smoking might make you more likely to get a more severe dose of flu. We would like to test this.
Please answer as accurately as possible. If you smoke other products (e.g. a pipe or cigars), then indicate roughly how many times a day. 
Tick all the options that apply. We are only interested in those allergies that cause respiratory symptoms (i.e. sneezing, runny nose, runny eyes).
Needs to have a check so that participants can't give inconsistent answers
(Select all options that apply) 
If you are filling this in on behalf of someone else, please answer all the questions as if you are that person.
-Needs to have a check so that participants can't give inconsistent answers -If report any symptoms, check database: was the participant STILL ILL when they last completed the Weekly survey (i.e. they said "I am still ill" in response to Weekly Q4 below last time?) AND have fewer than 15 days elapsed since they last completed the Weekly Survey AND fewer than 15 days have elapsed since their previous date of symptom onset -If Yes: continue with Weekly Q2 -If No or Don't know: then treat this as a "new" bout of illness, continue with Weekly Q3 -Of course, this only applies to people who have previously participated
(Select all options that apply) The key part of this survey is tracking people's symptoms.
For people with chronic (long-term) illnesses, only tick changes in symptoms. So, if you have chronic shortness of breath (for instance) then only tick this box if this has got worse recently.
The "don't know" option here might not apply to people filling it in for themselves but is relevant for people managing accounts for other people.
This means that the current symptoms are the start of a "new" illness: continue with Weekly Q3
If YES: This means that the current symptoms are the continuation of the same bout of illness as the previous visit. The remainder of the symptoms questionnaire (onset date, further details about symptoms, details about seeking medical attention, treatment, time off work/school) can be pre-filled with their previous answers.
The point of the pre-filling is to make the survey quicker and easier for participants who have longerduration symptoms.
"On DATE OF LAST VISIT you reported that you were still ill with symptoms that began on DATE OF FIRST SYMPTOMS REPORTED PREVIOUSLY.
Yes No I don't know/can't remember Why are we asking this?
To make filling out the rest of the survey quicker for you.
If you believe that the symptoms you have reported today are caused by the same bout of illness as your previous symptoms, please tick "yes".
To save you time, we have filled in the information you gave us previously about your illness. Please check that it is still correct, and make any changes -for instance, if you have visited a doctor or taken additional time off work since you last completed the survey.
When did the first symptoms appear?
Choose date XX/XX/XXXX I don't know/can't remember Why are we asking this?
To help us work out the number of cases of flu that arise each day.
Please give as accurate an estimate as possible.
Choose date XX/XX/XXXX I don't know/can't remember I am still ill Why are we asking this?
Using the beginning and end dates of symptoms we can work out how long respiratory infections last.
Please give as accurate an estimate as possible.
Yes No I don't know/can't remember Why are we asking this?
Sudden onset of symptoms is believed to be common for flu.
Tick yes if your symptoms appeared over a few hours rather than gradually developing over a few days.
When did your fever begin?
Choose date XX/XX/XXXX I don't know/can't remember Why are we asking this?
Fever is very important for diagnosing flu, so we want to know when this started.
Please give as accurate an estimate as possible.
Yes No Don't know Why are we asking this?
Flu is often associated with a sudden onset of fever
Tick yes if your fever appeared over a few hours rather than gradually developing over a few days.
Did you take your temperature?
No I don't know Why are we asking this?
Flu often causes a high temperature. However, not everyone takes their temperature when they are ill.
Answer yes, if you took your temperature using a thermometer.
What was your highest temperature measured? Flu often causes a high temperature.
Give the highest temperature you recorded during this episode of illness.
Will need to be adjusted to suit different countries.
(Select all options that apply) To find out whether people contact the health services because of their symptoms.
Tick all of those that apply. If you are due to see attend, then tick the final option.
This should be asked for each option ticked in the previous question (not including "No" or "Not yet") To find out how quickly people with symptoms are seen by the health services.
Only record the time until your FIRST contact with the health services.
This is the UK version. Will need to be adjusted to suit different countries. To find out whether people contact the health services because of their symptoms.
Tick all options that apply
This should be asked for each option ticked in the previous question (not including "No") Preferably, it only displays the options selected in Weekly Q8.
How soon after your symptoms appeared did you first contact via telephone or internet any of the following? To find out how quickly people with symptoms contact the health services.
Only record the time until your FIRST contact with the health services.
This is adapted to the UK situation. Other countries will need to adapt the brand names of the commonly used pain killers or antipyretics Needs to have a check so that participants can't give inconsistent answers.
(Select all options that apply) To find out who gets treated, and how effective treatment is.
Only record those medications that you used because of this bout of illness. If you are on other medications because of a pre-existing illness then do not record these. Antivirals are thought to be most effective if taken quickly after disease onset.
Report the time until you first started taking antivirals (which may not be the same day as you got your prescription).
Did you change your daily routine because of your illness?
Yes, but I did not take time off work/school Yes, I took time off work/school Why are we asking this?
To measure how people's daily lives are affected by their symptoms.
We want to know if you were absent from work or school as a result of your illness, or if you changed your routine in other ways (e.g. stopped attending clubs).
Are you still off work/school?
Other (e.g. I wouldn't usually be at work/school today anyway)
To estimate the average amount of time that people take off work, we need to know if people are still off work.
Tick "yes" if you would be at work/school today if you were not currently ill.
How have you been off work/school for? To measure the effect of symptoms on people's daily lives.
Only count the days that you normally would have been in school or work (e.g. don't count weekends).
o To help find out if our assessment of your illness based on your symptoms matches what you believe to be the cause. You might have a better idea of what is causing your illness than our computer algorithms.
If you are reasonably sure about what is causing your symptoms, please tick the appropriate box. Otherwise, please tick "I don't know".
Flu is spread via social contacts. Measuring how we meet each other helps understand and predict flu epidemics. Think about the all people you met yesterday and where you met them.
Each select box has options 0 (pre-filled), 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16-24, 25-49, 50-99, 100+ How many people did you have conversational contact with yesterday (talking face to face)? To find out whether people who have many contacts (perhaps with certain age groups) are more likely to experience symptoms.
Only record people in one setting. So if you saw someone at work and socialising, then only record them in the place where you spent most time together. "Home" means your home. "Work" means you place(s) of work (or school for younger participants).
Anyone you have had a conversational contact AND a physical contact with should be recorded both here and in the next question -i.e. they should be included twice.
Each select box has options 0 (pre-filled), 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16-24, 25-49, 50-99, 100+ How many people did you have physical contact with yesterday (skin-to-skin contact, e.g. handshake, kiss)? Illnesses might be spread via touch (e.g. when shaking hands).
How should I answer it?
What was the furthest distance from home that you travelled yesterday?
Under 1 mile 1-4 miles 5-9 miles 10-29 miles 30-100 miles Over 100 miles Why are we asking this?
To find out how far you travel, and whether there is a link with catching flu.
If you did not leave home, then tick the "under 1 mile" option.
Version in kilometres for continental Europe What was the furthest distance from home that you travelled yesterday? To find out how far you travel, and whether there is a link with catching flu.
If you did not leave home, then tick the "under 1 km" option.