Our parameterization of carrying capacity, defined as K = (b 0 − d 0 )/b 1 did not influence model predictions ( Figure A1 ). We examined a broad range of carrying capacities, finding that the estimation of pathogen invasion probability was insensitive to changes in carrying capacity. The value of b 1 in the main text corresponds to a carrying capacity of 640 individuals L −1 , which was the maximum density we examined in our experimental infection trials. However, as we demonstrate here, our findings are robust to other values of b 1 . This is not surprising, as the focus is on the transient period after pathogen exposure, such that carrying capacity does not play a large role in pathogen invasion. 
In the stochastic version of our model, the rate at which i individuals become infected by the fungal pathogen is a non-homogeneous Poisson process. This is a result of environmental pathogen death altering the potential number of infection events over time. This derivation does not consider spore loss through host foraging, as this does not strongly influence pathogen invasion. Here, we can define the intensity function
where the per spore infectivity (u) and host filter rate (γ) influence the rate at which a host ingests infective pathogen, and the environmental pathogen (P * ) is lost from the system at rate µ. The mean intensity over the experimental time period of pathogen invasion (0 -11 days) then becomes
The probability of observing n infection events in this time period is then
and the probability of observing no infection events (n = 0), and the probability of observing one or more infection event (i.e., pathogen invasion) are
where x is the number of susceptible hosts in the population.
The four parameters involved in the calculation of R 0 (γ, θ, u, and µ) differed in the way they influence the relationship between host density and R 0 , both in terms of the general shape of the relationship and the size of the standard error bars ( Figure A2 ).
For instance, the number of spores produced per infected host θ did not influence R 0 as strongly as pathogen death rate (µ), spore consumption rate (u), or per spore infectivity (γ). This is potentially due to the latter three parameters contributing to the infection process (i.e., the transition from environmental pathogen to infected host), while θ determines the transition from infected host to the amount of environmental pathogen for the next round of infection. 
Below, we outline the structural forms of two SI models with environmental pathogen (P), differing in the rate at environmental pathogen loss as a function of host foraging.
Host foraging had almost no influence on critical host density for pathogen invasion ( Figure A3 ) except at large initial host densities. Further, it is unlikely that host foraging on pathogen could reduce infection dynamics, except at large densities, or very high feeding rates (γ). As crowding tends to reduce host filtering rate [1] , it is unlikely to observe both a dense population and a high filtering rate. We provide R 0 calculations for both models, though the R 0 calculation for the SI model without spore loss through host foraging is also in the main text.
Next generation matrix determination of R 0 We used the next generation matrix method [2] ), which is the dominant eigenvalue of the product of two matrices (F and V −1 ). The calculation of R 0 follows the "transition" scenario of [3] , in which the pathogen does not grow outside of hosts, but essentially acts as a second state of infected host. Specifically, hosts contribute pathogen to the environment, and that environmental pathogen is the only source of infection for hosts (i.e., there is no host-host transmission).
Model with spore loss through host foraginġ
Heuristic formulation of R 0 In the main text, we defined R 0 from first principles.
The same method can be applied to the model incorporating spore loss through host foraging. From first principles, R 0 would correspond to the product of the total pathogen produced by a single infected host, the total number of spores consumed by hosts when S = S * , and average environmental spore lifespan. This is the same formulation as in the model without host foraging on spores, but with a reduction in environmental spore lifespan proportional to the host foraging rate.
Next-generation R 0 calculation The calculation of R 0 using the next generation matrix technique is nearly equivalent for this model relative to the model without spore loss through host foraging, except that pathogen is lost from the V matrix not only through pathogen death (µ), but also through a foraging rate (γ) scaled by the average transient host density during the invasion window (S * ). Only at very high host densities would spore foraging be predicted to suppress R 0 , and this suppression is not enough to influence pathogen invasion thresholds.
Previous research has suggested that intraspecific interactions among hosts may result in feeding suppression, which could reduce epidemic size and perhaps even create an upper host density threshold to pathogen invasion at high host densities [4] . Further, this would result in a non-monotonic relationship between host density and the pathogen invasion threshold, as a result of suppressed host feeding at high host densities resulting in reduced pathogen transmission. We did not find support for an upper host density threshold to pathogen invasion ( Figure A4 inset) . On the other hand, epidemic size and max infection prevalence declined in the highest host density treatment, suggesting that epidemics weren't as severe when host density was extremely high. This suggests that dense host populations may experience smaller overall epidemics, but casts doubt on the existence of an upper host density threshold to pathogen invasion. 