(A) Dual-luciferase frameshift reporter plasmids (Grentzmann et al., 1998; Fixsen et al. 2010) harbouring the -1 PRF signals of human immunodeficiency virus gag/pol (HIV; stem-loop stimulatory RNA; SL), mouse mammary tumor virus gag/pro (MMTV; pseudoknot stimulatory RNA; PK) (Girnary et al., 2007), infectious bronchitis virus 1a/1b (IBV; PK) (Brierley et al., 1992) or the IBV slippery sequence (U_UUA_AAC) but lacking the PK (no structure) were transcribed in vitro and the resulting mRNAs translated in RRL in the absence or presence of nsp1β. The products were resolved by 15% SDS-PAGE and visualised by autoradiography. Molecular size markers were also run on the gel (M). Products derived from ribosomes that do not frameshift (stop) or that enter the −1 frame (-1 FS) are indicated. No specific inhibition or stimulation of frameshifting was seen, although some general inhibition of translation was FIGURE S1: related to Figure 1. Nsp1β does not modulate PRF at established ribosomal frameshifting signals, nor stimulate programmed stop codon readthrough.
observed at the highest concentration of nsp1β. (B) Variants of pDluc PRRSV/wt were prepared with an in-frame stop codon (UAG) placed within the slippery sequence at the position that would likely be decoded in the peptidyl-(P) or aminoacyl-(A) site of the ribosome during encounter of the nsp1β/PCBP complex. Transcribed mRNAs were translated in RRL in the presence of nsp1β alongside wild-type controls (wt). To align the stop codon with the outgoing -2 frame, a 3' base was deleted in each case (space underlined). In the configurations tested, no programmed readthrough event was detected. were transfected with siRNA pools targeting PCBP1, PCBP2, PCBP3, PCBP4 or hnRNP K/J. Knockdown of proteins targeted by siRNAs was assessed by Western blotting (note: a suitable antibody for PCBP3 was not available). Knockdown of PCBP3, PCBP4 and hnRNPK resulted in an increase in PCBP1 expression, which might be a compensatory mechanism. In RK-13 cells, knockdown of PCBP2 also induced knockdown of PCBP1, possibly through an siRNA off-target effect (one of the siRNA sequences had only a single nt mismatch with rabbit PCBP1 mRNA and two mismatches with African green monkey PCBP1 mRNA). expression system to generate both the polyprotein fragment nsp1β-2 (which self-cleaves to provide proteins nsp1β and nsp2) and the encoding mRNA containing the PRRSV -2/-1 PRF signal. After metabolic labeling, expression products were immunoprecipitated with mAb α-EU-nsp2 that recognises the common N-terminal domain of nsp2, nsp2TF, and nsp2N. Immunoprecipitated proteins were separated by 6% SDS-PAGE and visualised by autoradiography to assess frameshifting efficiencies. Knockdown of PCBP3 in MARC-145 cells resulted in accelerated cell death during infection with recombinant vaccinia virus vT7-3, resulting in lower band intensities for the three nsp2 products upon immunoprecipitation compared to the other conditions. (C & F) PRF efficiencies (%, y-axis) measured for each knockdown condition. Protein bands were quantified (triplicates) using ImageQuant TL software for MARC-145 cells (C) and RK-13 cells (F). The total intensity of all protein bands (nsp2, nsp2', nsp2TF, nsp2TF', nsp2N and nsp2N') was set as 100%. Frameshift efficiencies were calculated after normalisation for the methionine and cysteine content of each protein product. The products nsp2', nsp2TF' and nsp2N' are precursors. Note the baseline % FS differs in MARC-145 and RK-13 cells. Error bars represent SEM values (from triplicates).
(A) Left side. EMSA titration of binding of nsp1β and PCBP2 to a short (58 nt) 32 P-labelled in vitro transcript containing the PRRSV PRF signal. After incubation at room temperature for 10 min, reactions were loaded onto a 4% non-denaturing polyacrylamide gel and following electrophoresis, the gel was fixed, dried and subjected to autoradiography. Nsp1β was present throughout at 0.8 µM and the numbers below lanes show fold molar excess of PCBP2 with respect to the radiolabelled RNA (10 nM). BSB: RNA was incubated alone with band-shift buffer (BSB). Right side. Control EMSA showing similar RNA binding capacity of wild-type nsp1β/PCBP2 (NP2) and PR mutant nsp1β/PCBP2 (N PR P2) complexes. (B) RNA/protein complexes and free RNA were quantified by phosphorimagery and a binding curve plotted. From this, the Kd was estimated as 130 nM. (C) Control EMSA reveals that nsp1β RBM mutant (at indicated molar excesses with respect to RNA) does not form stable RNA protein complexes in the absence (RBM, 1µM) or presence of PCBP2 (1 µM). Control lanes were nsp1β (N, 1 µM) and PCBP2 (P2, 1 µM) alone, both proteins together (NP2, 1 µM each) and BSB. (D) Control EMSA confirms that RNA protein complexes do not form on the CC2 mRNA. Wild-type RNA (wt RNA) was used as a positive control. Figure S4 (A) Short, competitor RNAs containing the PRRSV PRF signal, the CC2 mutant or the poliovirus IRES stem-loop IV (P3/Leon/37; accession number K01392.1) were prepared by in vitro transcription. (B) An mRNA (0.25 µM) derived from FspI-cut pDluc PRRSV/wt was translated in RRL in the presence of increasing molar excesses of competitor RNAs (numbered above the relevant lanes). The products were resolved by 12% SDS-PAGE and visualised by autoradiography. Molecular size markers were also run on the gel (M). Products derived from ribosomes that do not frameshift (stop) or that enter the −1 or −2 frames are indicated. 
To determine frameshifting efficiencies after siRNA-mediated knockdown of PCBP expression, 6x10 4 MARC-145 or 4.8 x 10 4 RK-13 cells were seeded per well in 12-well clusters in DMEM containing 8% FCS. MARC-145 cells were transfected with siGENOME Human siRNA SMARTpools (Dharmacon) targeting PCBP1, PCBP2, PCBP3, PCBP4, or hnRNPK (final concentration 10 nM) using 2 µl of Dharmafect1 lipofection reagent (Dharmacon) per well. RK-13 cells were transfected with siRNA pools targeting PCBP1 or PCBP2 (final concentration 25 nM) using 3 µl Lipofectamine 2000 (LifeTechnologies) per well. A non-targeting pool (NTP) of "scrambled" siRNAs (Dharmacon) was used as a negative control. At 24 h post transfection (p.t.), the transfection medium was replaced with DMEM containing 8% FCS. Possible cytotoxic effects of siRNA transfection were monitored at 48 h p.t., using the CellTiter 96® AQueous Non-Radioactive Cell Proliferation Assay (Promega). After 120 min, the reaction was stopped by the addition of 25 µl of 10% SDS and absorbance at 490 nm (A490) was measured using a 96-well plate reader (Berthold Using these values, -2 PRF efficiencies were calculated as (nsp2TF + nsp2TF′)/(nsp2 + nsp2′ + nsp2TF + nsp2TF′ + nsp2N + nsp2N′) and -1 PRF efficiencies were calculated as (nsp2N + nsp2N′)/(nsp2 + nsp2′ + nsp2TF + nsp2TF′ + nsp2N + nsp2N′). Quantification was performed in triplicate.