Here we consider a more complicated model of IFN, namely one which uses Michaelis-Menten dynamics to describe the secretion of IFN as a function of infected cells. We again assume that IFN decays at some rate dF and that NK cells kill infected cells at a rate proportional to κIF . The model is given by:
Here we consider a more complicated model of IFN, namely one which uses Michaelis-Menten dynamics to describe the secretion of IFN as a function of infected cells. We again assume that IFN decays at some rate dF and that NK cells kill infected cells at a rate proportional to κIF . The model is given by:
where V = ρI. For simplicity, we also assume the rate of infected cell death δ = 0. This model has five free parameter combinations (βρ, κ, q, d and K) and one free initial condition (I(0)). Supplementary figure 1 shows that this model (under the parameterization provided in Supplementary Table S1 ) can recover all of the characteristic features of a primary dengue infection: the final fraction of uninfected cells, time to peak viremia, viral clearance rate, and peak viral load. To reproduce these features, particularly the high viral clearance rate, the model requires high IFN levels late in infection ( Figure S1d ). These high IFN levels late in infection are, however, inconsistent
Article submitted to Royal Society T E X Paper 2. Alternative disease severity formulations 9.4 9.5 9.6 9.7 9.8 9. 
, δ T , q T , and d T are varied in these LHS simulations. (a) A scatterplot of peak viremia (log 10 copies/mL) and the peak level of endothelial activators for each LHS simulation. (b) A scatterplot of time to viral peak (days) and the peak level of endothelial activators for each LHS simulation. (c) A scatterplot of daily viral clearance rate (log 10 copies/mL) and the peak level of endothelial activators for each LHS simulation. Here, the risk of severe disease is assumed to be proportional to the total amount of endothelial activators. S(0), β, ρ, κ, q N q d and d N are varied for a primary and secondary infection. T (0), δ T , q T , and d T are additionally varied for a secondary infection. Primary infection simulations are shown with pink dots. Secondary infections simulations are shown with dark blue pluses (α = 0) and light blue diamonds (α = 2 × 10 −5 ). (a) A scatterplot of peak viremia (log 10 copies/mL) and the risk of severe disease for each LHS simulation. (b) A scatterplot of time to viral peak (days) and the risk of severe disease for each LHS simulation. (c) A scatterplot of daily viral clearance rate (log 10 copies/mL) and the risk of severe disease for each LHS simulation.