Four current instructors for the longstanding Mindfulness Based Stress Reduction (MBSR) program at University of Wisconsin Integrative Medicine center are available to teach the 8-week meditation sessions for the proposed project. The format and content of the experimental intervention will mimic the current MBSR class structure.
homework: the 9 dots exercise and the theme of expanding the field of awareness in problem identification and problem solving. Make connection to class Presentation Theme:
• Perception and creative responding • how you see things (or don't see them) will determine in large measure how you will respond to them • "It's not the stressors per se but how you handle them" Normalize body scan experience.
• Tape These are expected mindfulness instructors, but there may be changes. All mindfulness (and exercise) instructors will received appropriate human subjects research training and be named to IRB HSC.
The exercise intervention behavioral modification program will be an 8-week individuallytailored program consisting of weekly 2½ hour group sessions and 45 minutes of exercise the other days of the week. Participants will attend 2½ hour sessions for 8 consecutive weeks. The group sessions will be led by exercise specialists experienced in leading groups. At time of writing, we expect that Jude Sullivan and Lisa Millbrandt will lead the exercise training sessions. Mr. Sullivan has a Masters degree in exercise physiology and Ms. Sullivan has a Bachelors degree. Both are licensed athletic trainers. Each has more than 20 years of experience in leading exercise training groups in both research and nonresearch settings.
Exercise sessions will include approximately 1½ hours addressing cognitive behavioral issues in a conference room and approximately 1 hour of group exercise in the UW Sports Medicine Fitness Center. The cognitive behavioral portion will consist of a check-in period to review the previous week's activities, a brief presentation on exercise, a discussion of behavioral change principles and activities and a wrap-up. The exercise portion will involve a warm-up (5-10 min), aerobic activity (work up to 30-40 min), and cool-down and stretching (10 min). Participants will be asked to exercise 45 minutes each day on their own. These sessions will consist of 5 minute warm-up, 30-35 min aerobic exercise and 5-10 min cool-down and stretching.
The mode of exercise for most participants will be brisk walking and or jogging. These activities are convenient and do not require special equipment. Participants will be exposed to other activities that they can do at home and programs will be developed for participants who have access to exercise equipment. For those unable or unwilling to walk or jog, alternative exercise strategies will be employed. For those with access to appropriate facilities/ equipment, swimming or bicycling (stationary or mobile) may be selected. Alternatively, dance could be chosen as the primary exercise. It is expected that most participants will choose a primary means of achieving moderate intensity exercise, and that walking or jogging will fulfill that role most often. However, the focus of the training will be on achieving and maintaining a regular exercise pattern that suits the lifestyle of the individual, with the goal of continued lifelong practice. Mixing two or more exercise modalities will be perfectly acceptable.
For both the supervised sessions and home exercise, Borg's Rating of Perceived Exertion (RPE) (1) will be used to monitor intensity. RPE provides a good estimate of exercise intensity particularly in individuals who have not had a graded exercise test and those who may be taking medications that affect heart rate response to exercise (2) . Participants will be asked to exercise at an RPE of 12-1c on the 6 to 20 scale. This intensity, corresponding to a rating of "somewhat hard" to "hard," is associated with physiologic adaptation to exercise (3) .
To monitor adherence to the 8-week program, participants will be asked to keep an exercise log. The log will include date, activity, duration and RPE. Participants will turn their logs in each week. Program staff will review the logs and help participants develop strategies for adhering to the protocol. After the 8-week session, participants will continue to complete exercise logs. These will be mailed in every 2 weeks. In addition participants will be called every two weeks by program staff to assess their frequency and duration of exercise. Also, participants will be asked to complete and objective self-report physical activity questionnaire (International Physical Activity Questionnaire-IPAQ) (3) at baseline, ate the end of the 8-week intervention, and then each month for 6 months.
The specific activities for each class are listed on the following pages: 6.4 .24 Blood pressure Blood pressure is a well-recognized health indicator. There is some reason to believe that stress reduction or regular exercise might reduce blood pressure. In this study, blood pressure will be assessed at baseline and at both standardized follow-up periods using standard calibrated sphygmomanometers. Blood pressure will be analyzed as a secondary outcome using methods described in Section 7.
Influence of interventions on secondary outcomes will be assessed using ANOVAbased multivariate regression models using SAS software.381-383 Adjustment for multiple comparisons will be incorporated, and interpretation will be cautious.238;384-388 In general, we will want to see relationships with p<0.01 in order to justify tentative null hypothesis rejection. Pre-planned secondary efficacy analyses will include effects of interventions on: ... 9) blood pressure ... 7.2.6.9 Those in the intervention groups will have lower blood pressure compared to control.
www.project-redcap.org 
Attendance is collected at all intervention sessions. The instructors send the attendance records to the MEPARI staff, where the data is manually entered into REDCap and verified.
7.2.7 Subgroup analyses ...Pre-planned secondary efficacy analyses will be conducted on the following sub-groups: 1) those who attend at least 7 of the 8 weekly training sessions ... One-sided testing will be based on the underlying hypotheses that: A) behavioral trainings are more likely to work for those who attend classes.
Appendix I: ... ARI episodes, missed work, etc [data] Per protocol (PP): Only people who attend at least 5 of the 9 exercise or mindfulness sessions will be included. For cohort 1 (2012-13) the following date will serve as cut-off for PP analysis: Oct. 22.
Computing Simple BFI Scale Scores 1=Disagree Strongly; 2=Disagree A Little; 3=Neither Agree or Disagree; 4=Agree a Little; 5=Agree Strongly Reverse score the items labeled "R" and compute scale scores as the mean of the following items:
Extraversion ( : 5, 10, 15, 20, 25, 30, 35R, 40, 41R, 44 Computing the content-balanced acquiesence index and Ipsatizing the BFI items (Ipsatizing looks at the degree to which a participant answers pre-paired "opposite" characteristic questions in opposite directions.) SPSS sytnax: compute within person response means [of raw score] and standard deviations for 3, 8, 9, 13, 18, 19, 23, 24, 28, 29, 34 ,39 as a Z-score. Conscientiousness: 3 and 43, 8 and 13; 18 and 33; 23 and 28
Neurotiscism: 9 and 19; 24 and 29; 34 and 39
From the MEPARI Protocol Manual 07-18-12 (p. 13, 16) 6.4.5 Big Five Inventory (BFI) Research on personality and health has been underway for some time, leading to various conceptual structures of state and trait psychological domains. The Big Five taxonomy has helped clarify and organize the links between personality, health behaviors, illness and mortality across the lifespan. Of the five dimensions measured (openness, conscientiousness, extraversion, agreeableness, and neuroticism), we will use baseline "conscientiousness" and "neuroticism" scores on the Big Five Inventory to gauge propensity for self-report bias on instrument completion activities, and to control for between person differences in multivariate efficacy models.
John OP, Naumann LP, Soto CJ. Paradigm shift to the integrative big-five trait taxonomy: History, measurement and conceptual issues. In John OP, Robins RW, Pervin LA, eds. Handbook of Personality: Theory and Research , pp 114-58. New York: Guilford Press, 2008.
Interleukin 6 secondary outcome, potential mediator Interleukin 8 secondary outcome, potential mediator IFN-induced Protein 10 secondary outcome, potential mediator C-reactive Protein secondary outcome, potential mediator Procalcitonin secondary outcome, potential mediator Neutrophil potential mediator HgA1C secondary outcome Viral Identification secondary outcome, potential mediator
Outcomes: Blood and nasal wash samples will be obtained at baseline, one month after the end of the 8-week interventions, and once again three months later. Blood and nasal wash samples will be obtained approximately 24-72 hours into each ARI episode. Nasal wash samples will be tested with multiplex PCR (polymerase chain reaction) to identify etiological agents. Serum and nasal wash will be analyzed for interleukin-6, interleukin-8, C-reactive protein, procalcitonin, and interferon-gamma-induced protein 10. These inflammatory biomarkers will serve as objective indicators of disease severity to compare with illness severity self-reported on the WURSS-24 ... Inflammatory biomarkers ... will be analyzed as potential mediators of causal pathways leading from behavioral training interventions to ARI illness outcomes.
Gern's lab, where high-throughput PCR-based multiplex methods have been developed and authenticated, and are able to identify nearly all of the pathogens associated with ARI illness 36;261-264 Trial will assess 2 samples, one done by self-swab at home, and the other by nasal wash at lab. We will also improve sample processing and include newly developed viral types. Dr. Gern's published data report that up to 91.4% of nasal washes from community-acquired ARI can yield positive viral IDs. 265
Laboratory-assessed objective measures will primarily serve to corroborate selfreports of disease severity. C-reactive protein (CRP) and procalcitonin (PCT) are well-established indicators of disease severity during respiratory infection, and can be measured in serum as well as in nasal wash. 113;115;118-120 Concentrations of interleukin-6 (IL-6) 266-271 and interleukin-8 (IL-8) 272-276 in nasal wash have been shown to correlate with illness severity. More recently, interferon-gamma-induced protein 10 (IP-10) has been shown to be measurably increased in both serum and nasal wash during times of acute viral ARI. 122-128 Inflammatory cytokines will be measured by ELISA methods in laboratories directed by Dr. Coe and Dr. Hayney.
The same array of pro-inflammatory cytokines will also be analyzed as indicators of low level inflammation or pro-inflammatory tendency and as potential mediators of effects of behavioral interventions on ARI illness incidence, duration, and severity. The importance of CRP, PCT and IL-6 has been underscored by the ability of these pro-inflammatory biomarkers to predict mortality. [277] [278] [279] [280] [281] [282] [283] [284] [285] As potential mediators, pro-inflammatory cytokines (CRP, PCT, IL-6, IL-8, IP-10) will be assessed as change from baseline to one month after the 8 week behavioral interventions finish. Repeating these assays 3 months later will assess whether potential pro-inflammatory changes resulting from interventions will be sustained.
in nasal mucus is a relatively well-established indicator of inflammation of the nasal epithelium. [286] [287] [288] [289] [290] Neutrophil counts correlate to symptom severity, viral titer and cytokine levels. 174;291 ... Neutrophil counts will be done on nasal wash collected during ARI episodes.
Regular exercise is known to reduce hemoglobin A1C, a widely accepted indicator of average blood glucose levels. 142;292-294 There are at least two preliminary reports suggesting that mindfulness meditation might reduce HgA1C. 295;296 To explore these possibilities, we will assess HgA1C at baseline, 1 month after interventions, and again 3 months later.
For IL-6, a value of 0.01 indicates a level below detectable concentration, and for IP-10, a value of 1 indicates a level below detectable concentration. There is some reason to believe that stress reduction or regular exercise might reduce blood pressure. In this study, blood pressure will be assessed at baseline and at both standardized follow-up periods using standard calibrated sphygmomanometers. Blood pressure will be analyzed as a secondary outcome using methods described in Section 7.
Influence of interventions on secondary outcomes will be assessed using ANOVAbased multivariate regression models using SAS software.381-383 Adjustment for multiple comparisons will be incorporated, and interpretation will be cautious.238;384-388 In general, we will want to see relationships with p<0.01 in order to justify tentative null hypothesis rejection. Pre-planned secondary efficacy analyses will include effects of interventions on: ... 9) blood pressure ... 7.2.6.9 Those in the intervention groups will have lower blood pressure compared to control. 
The GPAQ was developed and validated through the World Health Organization, and displays excellent reliability and responsiveness characteristics. 255;256 GPAQ scores will be used to assess degree-of-change resulting from exercise training, and for dose-dependency and mediation analyses.
Bull FC, Maslin TS, Armstrong T. Global physical activity questionnaire (GPAQ): nine country reliability and validity study. J.Phys.Act.Health 2009;6:790-804.
Unless participants request a weekly phone call from study personnel for assistance in completing a WEEKLY CHECK-IN survey, they are sent weekly email reminders to complete the electronic survey. Once the weekly check-in survey is accessed, the first question answered is whether or not participants have had cold symptoms in the previous week (Monday-Sunday), and if they answer affirmatively, they are told to call the study phone number, if they have not already done so. The survey also asks questions about their visits to healthcare providers (including type of provider visit -i.e., primary care, specialty clinic, urgent care, emergency room, other), overnight hospitalizations, and the reason for the visit/hospitalization. UWHC rates tied to the visit type will be used to calculate healthcare usage costs. The next series of questions on the Weekly Check-in asks about hours of missed work and reasons for missed work. Specific details of the anticipated usage of missed-work data is found in the scoring instructions for the DEMOGRAPHIC questionnaire, but the gist is that it will be tied to the hourly wage the participant reports earning on the demographic questionnaire.
Determination of whether healthcare utilization or missed work are related to an ARI will be done by confirming via Jackson score. In instances where a participant reports a healthcare utilization and/or missed work, and has not called to report an ARI, but answers "yes" to the cold symptom question on the weekly check-in survey or offers an explanation of the reason for visiting a healthcare provider and/or missed work that is unclear on its potential connection to an ARI, blinded study personnel will contact the participant to ask for more information and make a ARI-related medications will be captured on the final page of the RIDL booklets. The majority of this medication data will need to be hand-entered. Costs will be calculated using drugs.com or another similar online pricing guide.
6.4.6 Health care utilization and antibiotics prescribed Evaluation and treatment of ARI illness is very costly and often associated with unnecessary prescriptions, especially antibiotics. For this study, we plan to document total number of health care visits, ARI-related health care visits, and ARI-related prescriptions, including antibiotics. Each weekly communication will include the question, "Have you seen a doctor or visited a clinic, hospital or urgent care center?" Persons answering "Yes" will be asked the reason for the visit. Those answers will then be classified by study personnel as either "Related," or "Unrelated" to ARI illness, including upper respiratory infection, influenza, pharyngitis, acute sinusitis, bronchitis, and pneumonia. All questionable cases will be verified by inspection of medical records (with casespecific participant permission). Prescriptions for antibiotics, prescription cough medicines, influenza antivirals and other ARI medications will be documented, as will self-reported use of nonprescription medications such as analgesics, antihistamines, decongestants, cough suppressants, and expectorants.
The dichotomous A and B questions noted below are scored 0=no and 1=yes. The virtual analogue scale (VAS) values are entered as whole numbers ranging from 0-100.
From the MEPARI Protocol Manual 07-18-12 (p. 15) 6.4.17 Feeling Loved (FL) In addition to the validated perceived social support measures described above, we will use two novel questions with Yes/No response options: A) Do you feel loved? B) Do you love yourself? and two questions with visual analogue (VAS) response scales: How loved do you feel? How much do you love yourself? The ends of each 100mm VAS scale will be bounded by "not at all" and "very, very much."
Sum the score of the symptoms. Range possibility of 0-24 (symptoms would only be assessed for severity if they are Date of completion of Jackson screening may be utilized to determine start date of ARI episode in the event that RIDL data is incomplete.
When affirmative response is made to Question 1 on Weekly Check-in indicating presence of cold symptoms in the past week, confirming of a Jackson score is first step to ensure ARI data is being captured.
Jackson score is used to validate ARI-relatedness of healthcare utilization and missed work.
Administered when participant calls to report suspected ARI.
The beginning of each ARI illness episode will be defined by: 1) answering "Yes" to either: "Do you think you have a cold" or "Do you think you are coming down with a cold?" AND 2) reporting at least 1 of 4 cold symptoms or synonyms: nasal discharge (runny nose); nasal obstruction (plugged or congested); sneezing; or sore (scratchy) throat, AND 3) scoring at least 2 points on the Jackson scale. The Jackson score is calculated by summing 8 symptom scores (sneezing, headache, malaise, chilliness, nasal discharge, nasal obstruction, sore throat and cough) rated , 0=absent, 1=mild, 2=moderate, and 3=severe. [170] [171] [172] In order for these symptoms to be classified as an ARI illness episode (and analyzed as such), at least 2 days in a row must meet these criteria. From the first day of ARI illness and forward each participant will fill out a daily WURSS-24 until they answer "No" to the question "Do you think that you are still sick with this respiratory infection?" for 2 days in a row. The last day the participant answers "Yes" will be the last day classified as ARI illness and included in the calculation of severity-weighted days of ARI illness.
Respondents indicate how frequently they have the experience described in each statement using a 6-point Likert scale from 1 (almost always) to 6 (almost never), where high scores reflect more mindfulness. This 15-item scale measures the frequency of mindful states in day-to-day life, using both general and situation-specific statements. Individual scores are summed and then divided by 15 to determine the mean MAAS score, which can range from 1 to 6. Higher scores indicate greater mindfulness.
MEPARI 2 scoring follows Carlson instructions; mean is decimalized to the tenth.
Instrument is administered at Baseline, November, January, March and Exit.
For our study, we will use the 15-item MAAS 248;249 to assess effects of MBSR training, and to help understand/explain potential mediating influences of mindfulness on our major outcomes. The MSES and MAAS instruments will also serve as an intervention check, in that scores are expected to change more among those randomized to meditation than in the exercise or control groups. Practice minutes will be summed within each of the 2 categories.
Unless participants randomized to the Meditation arm of the study request a weekly phone call from study personnel for assistance in completing their weekly practice logs, they are sent weekly email reminders to complete the electronic
After the 8-week intervention, participants assigned to the meditation group will be asked to continue meditation at ≥150 minutes/week, in sessions of at least 10 minutes each. Similarly, those assigned to the exercise group will be asked to continue moderate intensity exercise at ≥150 minutes/week, in sessions of at least 10 minutes each. Using modified versions of practice logs developed at the University of Wisconsin by Dr. Davidson (meditation) and at Appalachian State by Dr. Niemann (exercise), study participants will record their practice once daily on a paper log and will enter their practice minutes once weekly 7.2.7 Subgroup analyses ...Pre-planned secondary efficacy analyses will be conducted on the following sub-groups: ... 2) those who continue to exercise or meditate for an average of at least 60 minutes per week after the trainings end... One-sided testing will be based on the underlying hypotheses that: A) behavioral trainings are more likely to work for those who attend classes, and B) the interventions will be more effective for more highly stressed people.
Responses are ranked as 0=Not at all; 1=A little; 2=Moderately; 3=A lot; 4=Completely
The MSES comprises seven generic subscales of self-efficacy: 1. Behaviour (items 1, 8, 15, 22, 29) 2. Cognition (items 2, 9, 16, 23, 30) 3. Interoception (items 3, 10, 17, 24, 31) 4. Affect (items 4, 11, 18, 25, 32) 5. Interpersonal (items 5, 12, 19, 26, 33) 6. Avoidance (items 6, 13, 20, 27, 34) 7. Mindfulness (items 7, 14, 21, 28, 35) Before scale and global scores of self-efficacy can be calculated, 18 items must be scored in reverse. These are: 4 5 6 8 11 14 16 17 22 23 25 26 27 28 29 30 34 35 LOOKUP(#REF!,{0,1,2,3,4},{4,3,2,1,0}) When the score for each of the 18 items listed above has been reversed, you can sum the scores for each of the 7 dimensions. The scale scores provide an estimate of Dimensional Self Efficacy (DSE) for each dimension. To calculate the Global Self Efficacy (GSE) score, sum all DSE scores.
The current lack of psychometric data for the MSES renders the following ranges very tentative. They are currently only a rough clinical guide and scores must be interpreted with caution. 0-34 Poor sense of self-efficacy 35-69 Weak sense of self-efficacy 70-104 Moderate sense of self-efficacy 105-140 Good sense of self-efficacy
The MSES was constructed to measure the change in levels of self-efficacy before, during, and following mindfulnessbased therapy programs. Participants in these programs will relate more easily to some of the items presented, especially items 3 and 10 in Interoception subscale. This is because body scan tasks of such programs tend to increase interoceptive awareness and acceptance, whereas a number of non-experiential therapies do not. As a result, a person undergoing counseling or traditional cognitive therapy is likely to interpret a high score on item 3 as undesirable. The context in which this scale is being used is therefore a factor worth taking into account.
Instrument is administered at Run-in Homework, December, February and April From the MEPARI Protocol Manual 07-18-12 (p. 15) 6.4.19 Mindfulness-based Self-Efficacy Scale (MSES) Research aimed at defining and assessing the concept of "mindfulness" is well underway, with several questionnaire instruments available. [367] [368] [369] [370] [371] [372] [373] [374] The MSES is one of the more recent questionnaires, developed by Cayoun and Freestun to assess effects of MBSR training on perceived selfefficacy. 247 The MSES assesses 7 domains related to mindfulness self-efficacy, including behavior, cognition, interoception, affect, interpersonal, avoidance and mindfulness. The MSES will provide a nice counterpart to the ESES Secondary outcome, potential mediator http://www.mytherapysession.com/PDFs/MSESSelfEfficacyScale.pdf This citation link for the 36-item MSES is broken. Current instrument availability is of the MSES-R, a revised 22-item instrument.
The Positive Affect Negative Affect Schedule (PANAS) is a psychometric scale developed to measure the largely independent constructs of positive and negative affect, both as states and traits. Participants respond to 20 words by ascribing the degree to which they have felt them in the past few weeks. The options are 1 -very slightly or not at all; 2a little; 3 -moderately; 4 -quite a bit; 5 -extremely. Score for each affect direction (positive or negative ) range between 10 and 50, with higher scores indicating stronger affect tendency. Items 1, 3, 5, 9, 10, 12, 14, 16, 17 and 19 with high scores are indicative of a positive affect. Items 2, 4, 6, 7, 8, 11, 13, 15, 18 and 20 with high scores are indicative of a negative affect.
Sum the scores for each of the numbers corresponding to their respective affect.
Instrument is administered at Run-in Homework, December, February and April From the MEPARI Protocol Manual 07-18-12 (p. 14)
The widely used PANAS scale reliably assesses both positive and negative affect (emotion). 338 Self-reported positive and negative emotion have long been known to be independent predictors of psychological and physical health. 339 In the ARI setting, positive and negative emotion predict not only symptom expression, but actual infection as indicated by viral shedding. 9;13;340 In an RCT setting, PANAS scores improved after MBSR training, (p < 0.05) as compared to controls. 30
Participants indicate which statement best describes how much they've been bothered by the given 9 problems over the previous two weeks using a 4-point scale. Choices are: 0 (not at all), 1 (several days), 2 (more than half the days) and 3 (nearly every day); thus, summed scores can range from 0-27 with higher numbers indicative of depression.
Question 2 assesses functional health. Changes in scores after the intervention begins can show impact on patient's Make sure scanned scoring reflects 0-3, not [1] [2] [3] [4] Instrument is administered at Run-in, December, February and April From the MEPARI Protocol Manual 07-18-12 (p. 14) 6.4.10 Depression screen (PHQ-9) The PHQ-9 is a widely used and well-validated depression screen, 322-327 and also demonstrates good responsiveness. 328;329 In our study, prospective participants with PHQ-9 scores of ≥15 will be excluded (and referred to appropriate clinical care). PHQ-9 scores will be assessed as secondary outcomes.
Kroenke K, Spitzer RL, Williams JBW. The PHQ-9: Validity of a brief depression severity measure. J Gen Intern Med 2001;16:606-13.
Separate detailed scoring rubric exists.
The PSQI generates seven scores that correspond to these domains: Subjective Sleep Quality, Sleep Latency, Sleep Duration, Habitual Sleep Efficiency, Sleep Disturbances, Use of Sleep Medications, and Daytime Dysfunction. Each component score ranges from 0 (no difficulty) to 3 (severe difficulty). The component scores are summed to produce a global score (range of 0-21). A PSQI global score >5 is considered to be suggestive of significant sleep disturbance. Any missing data renders entire score null.
Be sure to check that values for scanned data for Questions 5a-5j range from 0-3, not 1-4 (need to convert otherwise.)
Responses to Questions 1 and 3 should be in military time (these values provide the time the participant spends in bed). Once the in-bed time has been calculated, it needs to be decimalized to be used in calculating a percentage of sleep efficiency. The sleep efficiency percentage algorithm uses a decimalized conversion of the response to Question 4. The % efficiency may be inverted positively (>100%) if estimates of self-reported hours of sleep per night are greater than what is derived from calculating the hours of sleep using the reported going to bed time and getting up time.
Instrument is administered at Baseline, November, January, March, Exit
Sleep quality may improve following interventions, and hence can be interpreted as a potentially important secondary outcome.
Buysse DJ, Reynolds CF, III, Monk TH, Berman SR, Kupfer DJ. The Pittsburgh Sleep Quality Index: a new instrument for psychiatric practice and research. Psychiatry Research 1989;28:193-213.
Gleaned from Cohen 1988 Participants indicate which statement best describes the frequency of their feelings and thoughts during the previous month using a 5-point scale. Choices are: 0 (never), 1 (almost never), 2 (sometimes), 3 (fairly often) and 4 (very often). Of the 10 items, 4 are worded in a positive direction and 6 are worded in a negative direction. After reversing the scoring for the positively worded items, item scores are summed to yield an overall perceived stress score with high scores representing greater perceived stress. Scores can range from 0-40.
Reverse scores for Items 4, 5, 7 and 8. Excel algorithm for reversal: IF(cell =4,0,IF(cell =3,1,IF(cell =2,2,IF(cell =1,3,IF(cell =0,4))))) Instructions for algorithm -replace the word "cell" with the actual cell correlates (A1, A2, A3, etc.) Instrument is administered at Baseline, November, January, March, Exit From the MEPARI Protocol Manual 07-18-12 (p. 14) 6.4.14 Perceived Stress Scale (PSS-10) The PSS-10 has been validated in multiple studies. 100-103;341-343 PSS scores predict rates of viral infection among volunteers inoculated with rhinovirus, and correlate with physiologic and self-report indicators of ARI illness, including nasal IL-6 level. 14;99-102 Because stress reduction is one of the hypothesized mechanisms of action, we have expanded our study population to include working-age participants, who we presume are more stressed. 7.2.7 Subgroup analyses ... Pre-planned secondary efficacy analyses will be conducted on the following sub-groups: ... 3) those who at baseline have perceived stress scores at least 14 points (PSS-10). One-sided testing will be based on the underlying hypotheses that: A) behavioral trainings are more likely to work for those who attend classes, and B) the interventions will be more effective for more highly stressed people.
http://www.ncsu.edu/assessment/resources/perceived_stress_scale.pdf Norm Interleukin 6 secondary outcome, potential mediator Interleukin 8 secondary outcome, potential mediator IFN-induced Protein 10 secondary outcome, potential mediator C-reactive Protein secondary outcome, potential mediator Procalcitonin secondary outcome, potential mediator Neutrophil potential mediator HgA1C secondary outcome Viral Identification secondary outcome, potential mediator
Outcomes: Blood and nasal wash samples will be obtained at baseline, one month after the end of the 8-week interventions, and once again three months later. Blood and nasal wash samples will be obtained approximately 24-72 hours into each ARI episode. Nasal wash samples will be tested with multiplex PCR (polymerase chain reaction) to identify etiological agents. Serum and nasal wash will be analyzed for interleukin-6, interleukin-8, C-reactive protein, procalcitonin, and interferon-gamma-induced protein 10. These inflammatory biomarkers will serve as objective indicators of disease severity to compare with illness severity self-reported on the WURSS-24 ... Inflammatory biomarkers ... will be analyzed as potential mediators of causal pathways leading from behavioral training interventions to ARI illness outcomes.
Gern's lab, where high-throughput PCR-based multiplex methods have been developed and authenticated, and are able to identify nearly all of the pathogens associated with ARI illness 36;261-264 Trial will assess 2 samples, one done by self-swab at home, and the other by nasal wash at lab. We will also improve sample processing and include newly developed viral types. Dr. Gern's published data report that up to 91.4% of nasal washes from community-acquired ARI can yield positive viral IDs. 265
Laboratory-assessed objective measures will primarily serve to corroborate selfreports of disease severity. C-reactive protein (CRP) and procalcitonin (PCT) are well-established indicators of disease severity during respiratory infection, and can be measured in serum as well as in nasal wash. 113;115;118-120 Concentrations of interleukin-6 (IL-6) 266-271 and interleukin-8 (IL-8) 272-276 in nasal wash have been shown to correlate with illness severity. More recently, interferon-gamma-induced protein 10 (IP-10) has been shown to be measurably increased in both serum and nasal wash during times of acute viral ARI. 122-128 Inflammatory cytokines will be measured by ELISA methods in laboratories directed by Dr. Coe and Dr. Hayney.
The same array of pro-inflammatory cytokines will also be analyzed as indicators of low level inflammation or pro-inflammatory tendency and as potential mediators of effects of behavioral interventions on ARI illness incidence, duration, and severity. The importance of CRP, PCT and IL-6 has been underscored by the ability of these pro-inflammatory biomarkers to predict mortality. 277-285 As potential mediators, pro-inflammatory cytokines (CRP, PCT, IL-6, IL-8, IP-10) will be assessed as change from baseline to one month after the 8 week behavioral interventions finish. Repeating these assays 3 months later will assess whether potential pro-inflammatory changes resulting from interventions will be sustained.
in nasal mucus is a relatively well-established indicator of inflammation of the nasal epithelium. [286] [287] [288] [289] [290] Neutrophil counts correlate to symptom severity, viral titer and cytokine levels. 174;291 ... Neutrophil counts will be done on nasal wash collected during ARI episodes.
Regular exercise is known to reduce hemoglobin A1C, a widely accepted indicator of average blood glucose levels. 142;292-294 There are at least two preliminary reports suggesting that mindfulness meditation might reduce HgA1C. 295;296 To explore these possibilities, we will assess HgA1C at baseline, 1 month after interventions, and again 3 months later.
For IL-6, a value of 0.01 indicates a level below detectable concentration, and for IP-10, a value of 1 indicates a level below detectable concentration. Manual 07-18-12 (p. 15, p. 20) 6.4.24 Blood pressure Blood pressure is a well-recognized health indicator. There is some reason to believe that stress reduction or regular exercise might reduce blood pressure. In this study, blood pressure will be assessed at baseline and at both standardized follow-up periods using standard calibrated sphygmomanometers. Blood pressure will be analyzed as a secondary outcome using methods described in Section 7.
Influence of interventions on secondary outcomes will be assessed using ANOVAbased multivariate regression models using SAS software.381-383 Adjustment for multiple comparisons will be incorporated, and interpretation will be cautious.238;384-388 In general, we will want to see relationships with p<0.01 in order to justify tentative null hypothesis rejection. Pre-planned secondary efficacy analyses will include effects of interventions on: ... 9) blood pressure ... 7.2.6.9 Those in the intervention groups will have lower blood pressure compared to control.
Height (in decimalized inches) is captured at baseline visit; weight (in decimalized pounds) is captured at Baseline, December, March and Exit visits.
Data is entered from CRU flowsheets into corresponding REDCap "event".
Excel formula for calculating BMI: 703*weight/height^2
From the MEPARI Protocol Manual 07-18-12 (p. 12)
Body habitus is associated with many disease processes, and may be related to immune function and susceptibility to respiratory infection. Height will be assessed at baseline only. Weight will be measured at baseline, 1 and 4 months post-intervention, and at exit. Baseline BMI will be calculated and used as a covariate in statistical models. BMI will also be considered a secondary outcome of potential importance. 
Socioeconomic status is related to health and disease, including incidence and severity of respiratory infection. Demographic indicators to be assessed will include age, sex, years of education completed, household income, and number of children under the age of 18 living in the home. Age, sex and education will be used as covariates in multivariate efficacy analyses.
*Salary information will be averaged to garner an average hourly salary across all jobs and will be used in conjuction with missed days of work reported on weekly HCU forms.
Number of children under age 18 living in the home is garnered from the SNI (see separate instrument instructions).
This is an 18-item scale scored on a scale of 0-10, with participants indicating their confidence in their ability to perform exercise on a regular basis. A score of 0 indicates their level of confidence as "cannot do at all", while a score of 10 indicates their level of confidence is "certain can do". Items are summed for each participant. Range of scores is 0-180.
Higher scores indicate higher levels of self-efficacy.
Instrument is administered at Run-in Homework, December, February and April When cleaning data, scanned "A" entries should be converted to "10".
From the MEPARI Protocol Manual 07-18-12 (p. 15) 6.4.18 Exercise Self Efficacy (ESES) Self-efficacy has been defined as "the belief in one's capabilities to organize and execute the courses of action required to manage prospective situations." The ESES scale was developed based on work by Bandura and colleagues, and has been validated by Shin, Kroll, and Everett. For our study, the ESES will be used to verify results of the exercise intervention, and to help explain potential mediational effects of exercise. (Bandura advocated for using a scale of 0-100).
Minutes of daily practice data for 7 days -Monday through Sunday -entered into REDCap. Categories as denoted in REDCap headings are moderate = 1 or vigorous = 2.
Practice minutes will be summed within each of the 2 categories.
Unless participants randomized to the exercise arm of the study request a weekly phone call from study personnel for assistance in completing their weekly practice logs, they are sent weekly email reminders to complete the electronic survey. Manual 07-18-12 (p. 15) 6.4.22 Mindfulness practice and exercise daily tracking log After the 8-week intervention, participants assigned to the meditation group will be asked to continue meditation at ≥150 minutes/week, in sessions of at least 10 minutes each. Similarly, those assigned to the exercise group will be asked to continue moderate intensity exercise at ≥150 minutes/week, in sessions of at least 10 minutes each. Using modified versions of practice logs developed at the University of Wisconsin by Dr. Davidson (meditation) and at Appalachian State by Dr. Niemann (exercise), study participants will record their practice once daily on a paper log and will enter their practice minutes once weekly through an on-line web-based data collection portal.
...Pre-planned secondary efficacy analyses will be conducted on the following sub-groups: ... 2) those who continue to exercise or meditate for an average of at least 60 minutes per week after the trainings end... One-sided testing will be based on the underlying hypotheses that: A) behavioral trainings are more likely to work for those who attend classes, and B) the interventions will be more effective for more highly stressed people.
Question order is being alternated; even numbers have exercise expectancy questions asked first; odd numbers have meditation. Q1 and Q3: No = 0; Yes = 1 Q2 and Q4: 1 = much worse; 2 = somewhat worse; 3 = slightly worse; 4 = the same; 5 = slightly better; 6 = somewhat better; 7 = much better; 8 = very much better Baseline Post-randomization AND Follow-up 1 Post-intervention "Thinking Ahead" 1 = much worse; 2 = somewhat worse; 3 = slightly worse; 4 = the same; 5 = slightly better; 6 = somewhat better; 7 = much better; 8 = very much better Exit "Thinking Back" Q1: No = 0; Yes = 1 Q2: 1 = much worse; 2 = somewhat worse; 3 = slightly worse; 4 = the same; 5 = slightly better; 6 = somewhat better; 7 = much better; 8 = very much better When running report from REDCap, using the "Raw" data gives the variables as numbered above.
In order to assess and potentially control for intervention-related expectancy, we will ask participants about their attitudes towards meditation and exercise before and after randomization, after the 8-week behavioral trainings, and at exit. 
The GPAQ was developed and validated through the World Health Organization, and displays excellent reliability and responsiveness characteristics. 255;256 GPAQ scores will be used to assess degree-of-change resulting from exercise training, and for dose-dependency and mediation analyses.
Bull FC, Maslin TS, Armstrong T. Global physical activity questionnaire (GPAQ): nine country reliability and validity study. J.Phys.Act.Health 2009;6:790-804.
Unless participants request a weekly phone call from study personnel for assistance in completing a WEEKLY CHECK-IN survey, they are sent weekly email reminders to complete the electronic survey. Once the weekly check-in survey is accessed, the first question answered is whether or not participants have had cold symptoms in the previous week (Monday-Sunday), and if they answer affirmatively, they are told to call the study phone number, if they have not already done so. The survey also asks questions about their visits to healthcare providers (including type of provider visit -i.e., primary care, specialty clinic, urgent care, emergency room, other), overnight hospitalizations, and the reason for the visit/hospitalization. UWHC rates tied to the visit type will be used to calculate healthcare usage costs. The next series of questions on the Weekly Check-in asks about hours of missed work and reasons for missed work. Specific details of the anticipated usage of missed-work data is found in the scoring instructions for the DEMOGRAPHIC questionnaire, but the gist is that it will be tied to the hourly wage the participant reports earning on the demographic questionnaire.
Determination of whether healthcare utilization or missed work are related to an ARI will be done by confirming via Jackson score. In instances where a participant reports a healthcare utilization and/or missed work, and has not called to report an ARI, but answers "yes" to the cold symptom question on the weekly check-in survey or offers an explanation of the reason for visiting a healthcare provider and/or missed work that is unclear on its potential connection to an ARI, blinded study personnel will contact the participant to ask for more information and make a
Responses are ranked as 0=Not at all; 1=A little; 2=Moderately; 3=A lot; 4=Completely
The MSES comprises seven generic subscales of self-efficacy: ) When the score for each of the 18 items listed above has been reversed, you can sum the scores for each of the 7 dimensions. The scale scores provide an estimate of Dimensional Self Efficacy (DSE) for each dimension. To calculate the Global Self Efficacy (GSE) score, sum all DSE scores.
The current lack of psychometric data for the MSES renders the following ranges very tentative. They are currently only a rough clinical guide and scores must be interpreted with caution. 0-34 Poor sense of self-efficacy 35-69 Weak sense of self-efficacy 70-104 Moderate sense of self-efficacy 105-140 Good sense of self-efficacy
The MSES was constructed to measure the change in levels of self-efficacy before, during, and following mindfulnessbased therapy programs. Participants in these programs will relate more easily to some of the items presented, especially items 3 and 10 in Interoception subscale. This is because body scan tasks of such programs tend to increase interoceptive awareness and acceptance, whereas a number of non-experiential therapies do not. As a result, a person undergoing counseling or traditional cognitive therapy is likely to interpret a high score on item 3 as undesirable. The context in which this scale is being used is therefore a factor worth taking into account. Manual 07-18-12 (p. 15) 
Research aimed at defining and assessing the concept of "mindfulness" is well underway, with several questionnaire instruments available. [367] [368] [369] [370] [371] [372] [373] [374] The MSES is one of the more recent questionnaires, developed by Cayoun and Freestun to assess effects of MBSR training on perceived selfefficacy. 247 The MSES assesses 7 domains related to mindfulness self-efficacy, including behavior, cognition, interoception, affect, interpersonal, avoidance and mindfulness. The MSES will provide a nice counterpart to the ESES Secondary outcome, potential mediator http://www.mytherapysession.com/PDFs/MSESSelfEfficacyScale.pdf This citation link for the 36-item MSES is broken. Current instrument availability is of the MSES-R, a revised 22-item instrument.
The Positive Affect Negative Affect Schedule (PANAS) is a psychometric scale developed to measure the largely independent constructs of positive and negative affect, both as states and traits. Participants respond to 20 words by ascribing the degree to which they have felt them in the past few weeks. The options are 1 -very slightly or not at all; 2a little; 3 -moderately; 4 -quite a bit; 5 -extremely. Score for each affect direction (positive or negative ) range between 10 and 50, with higher scores indicating stronger affect tendency. Items 1, 3, 5, 9, 10, 12, 14, 16, 17 and 19 with high scores are indicative of a positive affect. Items 2, 4, 6, 7, 8, 11, 13, 15, 18 and 20 with high scores are indicative of a negative affect.
Sum the scores for each of the numbers corresponding to their respective affect.
The widely used PANAS scale reliably assesses both positive and negative affect (emotion). 338 Self-reported positive and negative emotion have long been known to be independent predictors of psychological and physical health. 339 In the ARI setting, positive and negative emotion predict not only symptom expression, but actual infection as indicated by viral shedding. 9;13;340 In an RCT setting, PANAS scores improved after MBSR training, (p < 0.05) as compared to controls. 
Gleaned from Cohen 1988 Participants indicate which statement best describes the frequency of their feelings and thoughts during the previous month using a 5-point scale. Choices are: 0 (never), 1 (almost never), 2 (sometimes), 3 (fairly often) and 4 (very often). Of the 10 items, 4 are worded in a positive direction and 6 are worded in a negative direction. After reversing the scoring for the positively worded items, item scores are summed to yield an overall perceived stress score with high scores representing greater perceived stress. Scores can range from 0-40.
Reverse scores for Items 4, 5, 7 and 8. Excel algorithm for reversal: IF(cell =4,0,IF(cell =3,1,IF(cell =2,2,IF(cell =1,3,IF(cell =0,4))))) Instructions for algorithm -replace the word "cell" with the actual cell correlates (A1, A2, A3, etc.) Instrument is administered at Baseline, November, January, March, Exit
The PSS-10 has been validated in multiple studies. 100-103;341-343 PSS scores predict rates of viral infection among volunteers inoculated with rhinovirus, and correlate with physiologic and self-report indicators of ARI illness, including nasal IL-6 level. 14;99-102 Because stress reduction is one of the hypothesized mechanisms of action, we have expanded our study population to include working-age participants, who we presume are more stressed. 7.2.7 Subgroup analyses ... Pre-planned secondary efficacy analyses will be conducted on the following sub-groups: ... 3) those who at baseline have perceived stress scores at least 14 points (PSS-10). One-sided testing will be based on the underlying hypotheses that: A) behavioral trainings are more likely to work for those who attend classes, and B) the interventions will be more effective for more highly stressed people.
http://www.ncsu.edu/assessment/resources/perceived_stress_scale.pdf Norm 
Respondents answer yes = 1 or no = 0 on nine health issues and self-report their smoking status. SIC weighting formula = Age (in 5-year intervals) + Prior MI + 2*(Cancer) + Lung Disease + 2*(CHF) + 2*(Diabetes) + Pneumonia + 2*(Stroke) + 2*(Past Smoker) + 4*(Current smoker). 1 point was assigned for each 5-year interval above the age of 55. The SIC is a weighted score derived from self-report of conditions and incorporates history of previous myocardial infarction, cancer, chronic lung disease, chronic heart failure, pneumonia, cerebral vascular accidents, and smoking status. Smoking status is obtained by self-report and categorized as never, past, and current smoker. MEPARI 2 instrument has 2 added items: allergies and asthma. Manual 07-18-12 (p. 13) 
People with diabetes, cardiovascular disease and pulmonary disease are known to have increased risks when infected with influenza or other respiratory viruses. [305] [306] [307] The SIC is a simple 8-item measure shown to predict hospitalization and mortality. 308 We will add items on allergy and asthma, as these illnesses are known to be related to severity of ARI. The modified SIC will be assessed at baseline and exit, and used as a covariate to control for possible influences of chronic disease on ARI outcomes. Relationships of individual items to outcomes and to other co-variates will be explored. 
The instrument contains 24 items, four for each of the following: Attachment, Social Integration, Reassurance of Worth, Reliable Alliance, Guidance, and Opportunity for Nurturance. Half of the items describe the presence of a type of support and the others describe the absence of a type of support.
The respondent indicates on a 4-point scale the extent to which each statement describes her current social network. Responses range from 1 (strongly disagree) to 4 (strongly agree). After reversal of negatively worded items (indicated by an "R" below) a total score may be computed by summing all items. Subscale scores may be computed by summing items as follows: 
Items receive a value of 1=strongly disagree; 2=somewhat disagree; 3=uncertain whether I disagree or agree; 4=somewhat agree; 5=strongly agree Higher scores are indicative of a high level of presenteeism. Items 1, 3 and 4 are reverse coded.
http://www.drpelletier.com/chip/pdf/CHIP-stanford_presenteeism_scale.pdf If participant does not answer Questions 1-6 and indicates not applicable, all answers should be filled in -99. If participant answers Questions 1-6 AND answers not applicable below, disregard not applicable answer.
Instrument is administered at Run-in Homework, December, February and April. A modified version is administered during an ARI.
6.4.9 Absenteeism/Presenteeism At enrollment we will assess employment, including type of work, hours per week worked, and compensation, assessed as hourly wage. Each week we will ask about any missed work, ascertain number of hours missed, and assess and classify reasons for missing work as either ARI-related or not ARI-related. The person making the classification will be blinded to allocation. Beyond missed work (absenteeism), illnesses such as ARI can decrease energy and focus at work, 260 leading to lost work productivity 318 from reduced "presenteeism." 319 To refine economic impact analysis, we will assess self-reported ability to perform work using the Stanford Presenteeism Scale (StPS). 320;321 The standard 1-month recall version will be administered at baseline, then 1, 3 and 5 months after interventions. A modified version with illness-specific recall will be used at end of each ARI episode, at the end of the RIDL questionnaire booklet (see 6.3.3 above). 
The TLFB is a continuous measure of alcohol consumption based on recall of the prior two weeks, with 1 drink = 12 oz of beer, 5 oz of wine, and 1.5 oz of spirits. On the basis of the frequency and intensity of drinking, the TLFB measures the following: (1) days of heavy drinking in past 2 weeks, (2) number of drinking days in past 2 weeks, and (3) number of drinks per week. For MEPARI, tobacco usage is also calculated.
Instrument is administered at Baseline, November, January, March, Exit
Tobacco use is associated with depressed immune function and increased rate and severity of acute respiratory infection (ARI). 297 Overuse of alcohol also appears to be associated with immune system depression and increased levels of ARI illness. 297 To assess and monitor both tobacco and alcohol use, we will use the validated and widely used Timeline Followback method (TLFB). 298-302 We will consider tobacco use and alcohol overuse as secondary outcomes of potential importance. Baseline tobacco use will be used as a covariate in multivariate Interleukin 6 secondary outcome, potential mediator Interleukin 8 secondary outcome, potential mediator IFN-induced Protein 10 secondary outcome, potential mediator C-reactive Protein secondary outcome, potential mediator Procalcitonin secondary outcome, potential mediator Neutrophil potential mediator HgA1C secondary outcome Viral Identification secondary outcome, potential mediator
Outcomes: Blood and nasal wash samples will be obtained at baseline, one month after the end of the 8-week interventions, and once again three months later. Blood and nasal wash samples will be obtained approximately 24-72 hours into each ARI episode. Nasal wash samples will be tested with multiplex PCR (polymerase chain reaction) to identify etiological agents. Serum and nasal wash will be analyzed for interleukin-6, interleukin-8, C-reactive protein, procalcitonin, and interferon-gamma-induced protein 10. These inflammatory biomarkers will serve as objective indicators of disease severity to compare with illness severity self-reported on the WURSS-24 ... Inflammatory biomarkers ... will be analyzed as potential mediators of causal pathways leading from behavioral training interventions to ARI illness outcomes.
Gern's lab, where high-throughput PCR-based multiplex methods have been developed and authenticated, and are able to identify nearly all of the pathogens associated with ARI illness 36;261-264 Trial will assess 2 samples, one done by self-swab at home, and the other by nasal wash at lab. We will also improve sample processing and include newly developed viral types. Dr. Gern's published data report that up to 91.4% of nasal washes from community-acquired ARI can yield positive viral IDs. 265
Laboratory-assessed objective measures will primarily serve to corroborate selfreports of disease severity. C-reactive protein (CRP) and procalcitonin (PCT) are well-established indicators of disease severity during respiratory infection, and can be measured in serum as well as in nasal wash. 113;115;118-120 Concentrations of interleukin-6 (IL-6) 266-271 and interleukin-8 (IL-8) 272-276 in nasal wash have been shown to correlate with illness severity. More recently, interferon-gamma-induced protein 10 (IP-10) has been shown to be measurably increased in both serum and nasal wash during times of acute viral ARI. 122-128 Inflammatory cytokines will be measured by ELISA methods in laboratories directed by Dr. Coe and Dr. Hayney.
The same array of pro-inflammatory cytokines will also be analyzed as indicators of low level inflammation or pro-inflammatory tendency and as potential mediators of effects of behavioral interventions on ARI illness incidence, duration, and severity. The importance of CRP, PCT and IL-6 has been underscored by the ability of these pro-inflammatory biomarkers to predict mortality. 277-285 As potential mediators, pro-inflammatory cytokines (CRP, PCT, IL-6, IL-8, IP-10) will be assessed as change from baseline to one month after the 8 week behavioral interventions finish. Repeating these assays 3 months later will assess whether potential pro-inflammatory changes resulting from interventions will be sustained.
in nasal mucus is a relatively well-established indicator of inflammation of the nasal epithelium. [286] [287] [288] [289] [290] Neutrophil counts correlate to symptom severity, viral titer and cytokine levels. 174;291 ... Neutrophil counts will be done on nasal wash collected during ARI episodes.
Regular exercise is known to reduce hemoglobin A1C, a widely accepted indicator of average blood glucose levels. 142;292-294 There are at least two preliminary reports suggesting that mindfulness meditation might reduce HgA1C. 295;296 To explore these possibilities, we will assess HgA1C at baseline, 1 month after interventions, and again 3 months later.
For IL-6, a value of 0.01 indicates a level below detectable concentration, and for IP-10, a value of 1 indicates a level below detectable concentration.
Attendance is collected at all intervention sessions. The instructors send the attendance records to the MEPARI staff, where the data is manually entered into REDCap and verified. Attendance data scoring is reflected in the REDCap Participant data example at the start of Appendix C (and the MEPARI 2 instrument manual).
...Pre-planned secondary efficacy analyses will be conducted on the following sub-groups: 1) those who attend at least 7 of the 8 weekly training sessions ... One-sided testing will be based on the underlying hypotheses that: A) behavioral trainings are more likely to work for those who attend classes.
Appendix I: ... ARI episodes, missed work, etc [data] Per protocol (PP): Only people who attend at least 5 of the 9 exercise or mindfulness sessions will be included. For cohort 1 (2012-13) the following date will serve as cut-off for PP analysis: Oct. 22.
Interleukin 6 secondary outcome, potential mediator Interleukin 8 secondary outcome, potential mediator IFN-induced Protein 10 secondary outcome, potential mediator C-reactive Protein secondary outcome, potential mediator Procalcitonin secondary outcome, potential mediator Neutrophil potential mediator HgA1C secondary outcome Viral Identification secondary outcome, potential mediator
Outcomes: Blood and nasal wash samples will be obtained at baseline, one month after the end of the 8-week interventions, and once again three months later. Blood and nasal wash samples will be obtained approximately 24-72 hours into each ARI episode. Nasal wash samples will be tested with multiplex PCR (polymerase chain reaction) to identify etiological agents. Serum and nasal wash will be analyzed for interleukin-6, interleukin-8, C-reactive protein, procalcitonin, and interferon-gamma-induced protein 10. These inflammatory biomarkers will serve as objective indicators of disease severity to compare with illness severity self-reported on the WURSS-24 ... Inflammatory biomarkers ... will be analyzed as potential mediators of causal pathways leading from behavioral training interventions to ARI illness outcomes.
Gern's lab, where high-throughput PCR-based multiplex methods have been developed and authenticated, and are able to identify nearly all of the pathogens associated with ARI illness 36;261-264 Trial will assess 2 samples, one done by self-swab at home, and the other by nasal wash at lab. We will also improve sample processing and include newly developed viral types. Dr. Gern's published data report that up to 91.4% of nasal washes from community-acquired ARI can yield positive viral IDs 265
Laboratory-assessed objective measures will primarily serve to corroborate selfreports of disease severity. C-reactive protein (CRP) and procalcitonin (PCT) are well-established indicators of disease severity during respiratory infection, and can be measured in serum as well as in nasal wash. 113;115;118-120 Concentrations of interleukin-6 (IL-6) 266-271 and interleukin-8 (IL-8) 272-276 in nasal wash have been shown to correlate with illness severity. More recently, interferon-gamma-induced protein 10 (IP-10) has been shown to be measurably increased in both serum and nasal wash during times of acute viral ARI. 122-128 Inflammatory cytokines will be measured by ELISA methods in laboratories directed by Dr. Coe and Dr. Hayney.
The same array of pro-inflammatory cytokines will also be analyzed as indicators of low level inflammation or pro-inflammatory tendency and as potential mediators of effects of behavioral interventions on ARI illness incidence, duration, and severity. The importance of CRP, PCT and IL-6 has been underscored by the ability of these pro-inflammatory biomarkers to predict mortality. 277-285 As potential mediators, pro-inflammatory cytokines (CRP, PCT, IL-6, IL-8, IP-10) will be assessed as change from baseline to one month after the 8 week behavioral interventions finish. Repeating these assays 3 months later will assess whether potential pro-inflammatory changes resulting from interventions will be sustained.
in nasal mucus is a relatively well-established indicator of inflammation of the nasal epithelium. [286] [287] [288] [289] [290] Neutrophil counts correlate to symptom severity, viral titer and cytokine levels. 174;291 ... Neutrophil counts will be done on nasal wash collected during ARI episodes.
Regular exercise is known to reduce hemoglobin A1C, a widely accepted indicator of average blood glucose levels. 142;292-294 There are at least two preliminary reports suggesting that mindfulness meditation might reduce HgA1C. 295;296 To explore these possibilities, we will assess HgA1C at baseline, 1 month after interventions, and again 3 months later. 1) Dilute Capture Antibody in Coating Buffer according to lot specific instructions.
Add 100 μL of Capture Antibody dilution to appropriate wells.
Seal plate and incubate overnight at 4˚C.
Set out all reagents and allow to reach room temperature (RT) before use. Thaw samples if necessary.
Prepare Wash Buffer then rinse plate using the "Wash 3" program. Bang dry plate on absorbent paper to remove residual buffer.
Add 200 μL of Assay Diluent and apply an adhesive strip over the plate. Incubate at RT for 1 hr.
Repeat wash procedure from step 5.
Prepare Standard serial dilutions: a) Prepare a 200 pg/mL standard from the stock standard. b) Pipette 100 μL of Assay Diluent into wells B1/B2 -H1/H2. c) Pipette 100 μL of 200pg/mL standard into wells A1/A2 and B1/B2. d) Mix solution in wells B1/B2 by drawing and expelling with the pipette 10X. e) Draw up 100 μL from wells B1/B2 and add to next two wells mixing as before. f) Continue serial dilutions until wells G1/G2. After mixing, draw up 100 μL from both wells and discard. g) Assay Diluent in wells H1/H2 serves as the zero standard.
Add 100 μL of sample or control to assigned wells and apply an adhesive strip over the plate. Incubate at RT for 2 hr.
10) Rinse plate using the "Wash 5" program and bang dry plate. 11) Add 100 μL of prepared Working Detector to each well and apply an adhesive strip over the plate. Incubate at RT for 1hr.
12) Rinse plate using the "Wash 7" program and bang dry plate.
13) Add 100 μL of Substrate Solution to each well. Incubate at RT for 30 min. in the dark with no seal.
14) Add 50 μL of Stop Solution to each well. Read within 30 min. at 450 nm and a λ correction at 570. In the Soft Max software select option "Endpoint L1-L2." Select 450 as L1 and 570 as L2. On the plate reader, select 450 as λ1 and 570 as λ2. Read plate and export data to Excel worksheet.
Identification of viral etiological agents will be carried out in UW Pediatrics Viral Detection Laboratory, where a high-throughput multiplex PCR-based respiratory viral detection assay has been developed.
Consultant James Gern MD has access to an accurate and efficient system to identify viral etiological agents most commonly implicated in acute respiratory infection.
Purpose -To better understand the contribution of specific respiratory viruses to common cold illnesses, and to determine whether treatments in the protocol improve outcomes of specific viral infections, a practical and accurate assay is needed for detecting hundreds of virus strains in thousands of samples that are anticipated in this study.
Methods -To accomplish this goal, UW Pediatrics Viral Detection Laboratory implemented a high throughput (multiplexed, automated, 96-well format, 3 hr completion time) platform technology (PLx) that utilized a novel PCR chemistry (MultiCode  PLx, EraGen Biosciences, Middleton, WI). PLx simplifies molecular detection through the use of an expanded genetic alphabet (isoguanosine and isocytidine), allowing reaction products to be labeled and captured without many of the steps needed for standard protocols (sample clean-up, washing, transfer).
To implement the Multicode assay, all respiratory viral sequences in GenBank (> 2 million bases) were identified and analyzed, and the results were used to design Multicode primers for the simultaneous detection of all respiratory viruses. Hundreds of candidate primers were made and then tested against a panel of 140 cloned viral target cDNAs at 20 copies per reaction for the best specificity and sensitivity. This work yielded 19 primer sets for all target viruses. Each primer set was specific for the intended target and highly sensitive, detecting 20 copies of target cDNA or less, with a typical signal/noise ratio of 10 to 50. The performance and practicality of this Respiratory Multicode Assay (RMA) has been assessed by analyzing two sets of specimens. The first set consisted of 105 clinical specimens that were positive for HRV, RSV, Flu, PIV or Ad by traditional techniques. By RMA, all target viruses were detected with an overall rate of 91.4%. The second set of specimens consisted of 103 nasal mucus samples from 5-year old children with asthma and respiratory symptoms. The RMA detected viruses in 76 specimens (73.8%) compared to only 24 (23.3%) by traditional techniques. HRVs were the most frequent viruses detected (40/76). These results show that this high throughput and comprehensive PLx-based assay will improve the practicality and accuracy of detecting respiratory viruses in large epidemiologic studies. After its completion, RMA has been used for successfully analyzing ~30000 nasal samples (references are listed below).
All personal identifiers will be destroyed once data collection and analysis have been completed. For those who formally agree that we may keep their name and contact information for potential future research opportunities, the code list linking individual to study data will be destroyed.
B. Database Protection: All project data will be kept in password-protected securityensured databases. Project personnel will be required to enter separate personal logins and passwords both for computer workstations specifically designated for the project and for the database user authentication process. Personally identifiable information (name, address, date of birth, adverse effect reports, etc.) required for longitudinal study participant management will be stored in an encrypted database, on a local hard drive physically separate from the database storing research outcome data. Permission to view study participant information will be available only to the Principal Investigator or his designee, as regulated by the user authentication procedure. Data analysts will be restricted to viewing outcome data, and will not be able to access personal identifiers. The database used to perform confidential study participant tracking and reimbursement auditing functions will be accessible only to the PI and to the involved research specialists, following UW HS-IRB requirements.
Identifying information will be recorded either on a single detachable sheet of paper, kept in a locked filing cabinet, or in a separate password-protected security database, which will not have direct links to process or outcome data. Project databases will generate an unseen unique identifying code for each participant, separate from the study participant number used on data collection instruments, to connect the participant's multiple data elements. Association of that code with the study participant's identifying information will reside in an encrypted database separate from the study's research data, ensuring that no records in the dataset used for analysis will contain any data that could identify the participant. All computerized databases will be protected with passwords, with access restricted to appropriate study personnel.
C. Confidentiality During AE Reporting: AE reports and annual summaries will not include subject-identifiable material. Each report will have only the study identifier associated with that participant.
A. Definition: An adverse event (AE) is any untoward medical occurrence in a subject temporally associated with participation in the clinical study or with use of the experimental agent being studied. An adverse finding can include a sign, symptom, abnormal assessment (laboratory test value, vital signs, electrocardiogram finding, etc.) or any combination of these. A Serious Adverse Event (SAE) is any adverse event that results in one or more of the following outcomes:
• Death • A life-threatening event • Inpatient hospitalization or prolongation of existing hospitalization • A persistent or significant disability/incapacity • A congenital anomaly or birth defect • Important medical event based upon appropriate medical judgment B. Classification of AE Severity: AEs will be labeled according to severity which is based on their impact on the patient. An AE will be termed 'mild' if it does not have a major impact on the patient, 'moderate' if it causes the patient some minor inconvenience and 'severe' if it causes a substantial disruption to the patient's well being. However, due to the nature of this research study there are no "expected" adverse events.
C. AE Attribution Scale: AEs will be categorized according to the likelihood that they are related to the study intervention. Specifically, they will be labeled either definitely, probably, possibly or unrelated to the study intervention.
D. Expected Risks: Due to the nature of this study there are no "expected" adverse events or known risks.
E. SAE Reporting: SAEs that are unanticipated, serious, and/or possibly related to the study intervention will be reported to the Data and Safety Monitoring Committee (DSMC), HS-IRB, CRU, and NCCAM in accordance with requirements. Anticipated SAEs or those unrelated to the study intervention will be reported to the same individuals/entities in accordance with requirements.
A. Data Quality and Management 1) Description of Plan for Data Quality and Management: The study team will review all data collected on an ongoing basis for data completeness and accuracy as well as for protocol compliance. The procedures by which data were collected and verified during the preliminary trial described above were strong, but will be improved further for the proposed research. Specifically, we will develop a computer-assisted weekly monitoring system to improve identification, verification and monitoring of ARI illness. This security-protected web-based data collection system will be developed and overseen by UW Department of Family Medicine (DFM) programmer, Don Thomson, and administered by a DFM data manager to be hired and trained. Real-time inspection of incoming data will allow early identification and correction of any potential errors. Blinding of the person implementing this system to experimental group will reduce potential bias arising from self-report. Implication of strict criteria for defining the beginning and end of each ARI illness episode will further strengthen data integrity. Data that is not directly entered by participants (eg. monthly self-report questionnaires) will be scanned directly into a comma delimited database, with resulting electronic data compared to data on paper by hand. For data that is entered by project personnel, verification will be performed by someone other than the individual originally collecting the data, or by double-data entry. These procedures will facilitate verification of all primary and secondary endpoint data against original source documents. Statistical analysis will not be carried out until all data is complete.
B. Frequency of Data Review for this Study: Study progress and safety will be reviewed during bi-weekly co-investigator meetings (more frequently if needed). Progress reports, including patient recruitment, retention/attrition, and AEs will be provided to the Data Safety and Monitoring Committee at the end of each 8-week intervention, and then again at the conclusion of each yearly cohort.
C. Subject Accrual and Compliance 1) Measurement and reporting of subject accrual, adherence to inclusion/ exclusion criteria: Review of the rate of subject accrual, adherence to inclusion/exclusion criteria will occur after each cohort is enrolled. 2) Measurement and reporting of participant compliance to treatment protocol: Each participant will be assigned a study representative who will serve as his/her primary contact, to build a rapport and enhance protocol adherence. The primary contact cannot feasibly be blinded to allocation, which could potentially lead to bias. Thus, we will employ blinded-to-allocation personnel to assist participants with documenting and classifying ARI illness, sick days, and clinic visits. For most participants, weekly computer-assisted self-reports will be used to assess ARI illness. For those without internet access, weekly telephone calls will be scheduled. As soon as an ARI illness episode is verified by criteria, the participant will self-administer a nasal swab, and arrange a clinic visit where nasal wash will be obtained. During ARI episodes, participants will fill out respiratory infection daily logs, including both WURSS-24 self-assessments and questions documenting health care utilization and days lost to work. Adherence to meditation protocol during the 8-week program will be assessed by attendance records, teacher ratings of class participation, and daily practice logs. The meditation and exercise surveys will serve as additional intervention checks in that scores are expected to change more among those randomized to these interventions than to control groups. Continued adherence to meditation practice after the 8-week session will be assessed during bi-weekly phone contact during the 6month observation period. Integrity and consistency of both the meditation and exercise behavioral training sessions will be assured by the use of a structured training manual and by employment of the same instructors throughout the project.
D. Designation of an Independent Monitoring Committee: A U.W.-based Data and Safety Monitoring Committee will be implemented upon funding, with commitment from three previous members already obtained. They include four UW faculty: Paul Hutson, PhD (Pharmacy), Nasia Safdar, MD (Infectious Disease), Tom Cook, PhD (Biostatistics) and Margo Hoover-Regan MD (pediatric oncology, clinical trials). Each member is independent of the principal investigator and co-investigators. Commencement of the DSMC and approval by both our IRB and NCCAM will occur after notification of funding and prior to the accrual of any research participants.
E. Safety Review Plan: Study progress and safety will be reviewed during bi-weekly co-investigator meetings (more frequently if needed). Progress reports, including patient recruitment, retention/attrition, and AEs will be provided to the Data Safety and Monitoring Committee at the end of each 8-week intervention and then again at the conclusion of each yearly cohort. While there are no "expected" adverse events in this trial, any "unexpected" adverse events will be monitored in a timely fashion, and reported promptly to appropriate people.
Written informed consent will be obtained from each participant at entry into the study. Informed consent is obtained by the following process:
• The participant will be asked to review the study consent form.
• The project coordinator will meet with the participant to review the form, to confirm the participant's understanding of the study, and to answer any questions that the person might have. • Once the participant demonstrates understanding of the study and agrees to participate in the study, the consent will be signed in the presence of the study coordinator. • As outlined on the consent form, all participants will be free to withdraw consent at any time. . This packet will take approximately 30 minutes for you to complete. Please take your time answering these questions and provide a response to ALL questions. In order for your answers to be most helpful to us, we need you to complete the entire packet. It is important that you try to be as honest and accurate as you can.
The answers you give us will be kept confidential. The results will be used for study purposes only and your name will never be connected to the results.
Please ask your study coordinator if you have any questions. 
Five cc/nostril of warmed lavage fluid is delivered via pipette sequentially to each nostril while the head is tipped back. The fluid is then expelled into a sterile dish when the head is tipped forward. With the collection dish still in place, compression is applied to one and then the other nostril while the subject blows the opposite nostril free of mucous.
Procedure:
Pre-warm 10 ml of Hank's Solution (w/o phenol red) Nasal Wash solution.
2) Provide with tissues and place a dental bib on the Subject. Put on gloves and mask (mask is optional).
Prior to each Subject's first lavage, describe the procedure so the Subject is familiar with the entire sequence and can anticipate each next step.
Have the Subject hold a sterile petri dish in his/her dominant hand and instruct that the plate be held from the bottom to allow easy removal of the lid.
Instruct Subject to tilt-back the head sufficiently to retain the instilled lavage fluid in the nares. Suggest a 20-second trial practice of breath-holding while doing a guttural stop initiated by making a "K" sound while pressing the tongue to the roof of soft palate.
While the head is tipped back, use the pipette aid to dispense 5 ml of solution into each nostril.
Remove the cover of the petri dish and instruct Subject to bring the dish up to just below the nose and to then come forward with the head, allowing the fluid to drain into the petri dish. Take care not to allow the petri dish to come in contact with the mouth or saliva.
Assist Subject by applying gentle pressure to one nostril at a time, allowing blowing and expelling of any remaining fluid from the nasal cavity.
Lightly scrape the edge of nose with the petri dish to remove mucus. If fluid is excessively mucoid, you may need to suction the specimen from the petri dish, directly under the nose, while the Subject holds the dish. This allows more complete recovery of any nasal mucus.
Maintaining sterile technique, the specimen is pipetted into a 10 ml transport tube and capped tightly. The recovered volume and the nasal mucus index is noted and recorded on the symptom sheet.
This tube is then taken to the Lab for processing.
Mediational analysis is a method that can help researchers understand the mechanisms underlying the phenomena they study. The basic mediational framework involves a three variable system in which an initial independent variable affects a mediational variable, which, in turn, affects an outcome variable (Baron & Kenny, 1986) . The aim of mediational analysis is to determine whether the relation between the treatment conditions and the outcome variables is due, wholly or in part, to mediator conditions. While the Baron and Kenny (1986) approach (BK) is somewhat straightforward, it is complicated by the inclusion of longitudinal models. To address this challenge, we propose remodeling our longitudinal models as hierarchical models, with the repeated measures nested under each subject. Krull and MacKinnon (2001) have recently demonstrated an expansion of the Baron-Kenny approach to encompass hierarchical models. The BK approach may be incorporated into our proposed secondary analysis modeling strategy for assessing longitudinal data.
To demonstrate the BK approach for a repeated measures model, we demonstrate the point estimate of the mediated effect first for single-level data, which requires the estimation of a regression equation predicting the outcome measure (Yi) from the initial variable (Xi)
(1) Yi = β0+ βcXi + ri and the estimation of a regression equation predicting the outcome measure from the initial variable and the mediator (Mi) Yi = β0 + βc'Xi + βbMi + ri.
The difference between the estimates of the coefficients associated with the initial variable (Xi) in these two equations, βcβc', estimates the mediated effect as the extent to which the mediator accounts for the relationship between the initial and outcome variables (Judd & Kenny, 1981) .
Finally, calculating point estimates of mediated effects requires estimating a regression equation predicting the mediator from the initial variable
(3) Mi = β0 + βaXi + ri A straightforward reformulation of these single-level equations to the multilevel framework allows for the analogous estimation of mediated effects in repeated measures multilevel data. This reformulation is show here for the i th repeated measures nested under the j th subject:
This model includes both initial and mediator variables at the subject-level (j). For such a model, Equation 1 is formulated as for the previous model, with the Xj variable predicting the group intercept in the Level 2 equation. Equation 2 includes both the group level initial variable Xj and the subject-level mediator Mj in the subject-level equation. In this set of multilevel equations, only the intercept term has been specified as a random coefficient.
To address the difficulty of incomplete data, an "intention to treat" (ITT) analysis will be conducted, including data on all subjects who were randomized to intervention or control groups. The ITT approach: 1) preserves the effects of randomization, and 2) addresses the practical impact of interventions better than per protocol analyses. Because of potential consequences of missing data, it is a major goal of our trial to keep missing values to minimal. Inevitably, however, there will be some missing values, both in terms of sporadically missing items from those that complete the protocol, and from people who withdraw or are lost to follow-up. Several ad hoc methods for dealing with missing data in clinical trials have been used and were considered. (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) To deal with issues involved with participants who withdraw or are lost to follow-up, we propose dividing our subjects into two groups; protocol completers and non-completers. Variables based on these groupings will then be assessed for meeting the assumptions of either MCAR using Little's test (7) or MAR, using procedures proposed by Pottoff, et., al (8) . Contingent upon achieving either MCAR or MAR, the following imputation strategy will be used for our ITT analysis. If the missing values are NMAR, then standard methods of analysis are not valid and usually a sensitivity analysis is recommended. Stage 1 imputation will proportionally randomize protocol non-completers to either a "no ARI episode" (zero) designation or to a designation of ≥ 1 ARI episodes, with variable duration and global severity. In the first MEPARI study, 66 of 149 people (44.3%) randomized had at least one ARI illness episode. Stage 2 will then use multiple imputation methods (9) to impute the specific missing values of AUC and duration for those subject imputed to a non-zero ARI illness situation. The issue of sporadically missing data from protocol completers is most relevant to the primary outcome of global severity, assessed as area-under-the-time-severity curve, where the X-axis = duration and Y-axis = severity.
For sporadically missing WURSS-24 data, potential patterns of missing data will be assessed for MAR (8) , and if applicable, imputation will be done using an expectancy maximizing multiple imputation strategy. (4) Any and all decisions and data manipulations will be made by analysts who remain blinded to allocation.
The planned study size of n=396 consenting individuals randomized to 3 groups leading to n=360 people completing the protocol ( n=120 per group) is based on the results of our preliminary trial.1 For primary efficacy analyses, null hypotheses will be rejected if interventions are superior to control at a p ≤ 0.025, using one-sided testing, based on two-way contrasts between: 1) meditation vs. control and 2) exercise vs. control. The p ≤ 0.025 cut-off is chosen to be conservative and to allay concerns related to multiple comparison considerations. One-sided testing is supported by our own data and by available scientific literature. Given these parameters and our preliminary data, the sample size of n=120 per group should provide adequate power. However, when taking into account the zeroinflated and skewed nature of ARI illness data, and potential missing data and intention to treat considerations, actual power may be less. Given limitations on resources available, and a desire to minimize chances of both Type 1 and Type 2 errors, we feel that the proposed sample size will be adequate for this phase 2 randomized controlled human subjects clinical trial.
The power graphics below for global severity (AUC) and total days of illness (duration) are based on data from the first MEPARI trial. The first two are based on the zero-inflated model, which will be the model for testing of main hypotheses regarding primary outcomes (Mediation and Exercise versus control). The next six graphics show power curves based on simple t-test contrasts of the zeroinflated distributions.
Approximately 100 patients per group will be needed for 1-tailed (0.025 alpha) test.
Approximately 106 patients per group will be required for 1-tailed (0.025 alpha) test. 