The combined anti-microbial and anti-inflammatory properties of a macrolide, azithromycin, will improve clinical outcomes for infants hospitalised with moderate to severe bronchiolitis.
That co-infection with other respiratory pathogens alters an infant's immune response and is responsible for the differences seen in the clinical recovery of infants with bronchiolitis.
Assess the efficacy of a single dose of Azithromycin (30mg/kg) to a) Improve the clinical course of moderate to severe bronchiolitis (assessed by supplemented oxygen requirement and length of hospital stay). b) reduce the risk of further respiratory illness within 6 months of this bronchiolitis episode. c)
Profile the immunopathology of bronchiolitis in the presence and absence of co-existing respiratory infections.
Significance Bronchiolitis is the most common lower respiratory tract infection in infancy. It is primarily caused by infection of the respiratory epithelial cells by Respiratory Syncytial Virus (RSV) although other respiratory viruses including adenovirus, parainfluenza, influenza and human metapneumovirus may also contribute. Bronchiolitis is characterised by extensive inflammation of the lower airways with an associated increase in mucus production and necrosis of epithelial tissue. Clinically, bronchiolitis is manifested by presence of tachypnoea with wheeze and/or crepitations with a preceding upper respiratory illness.
Bronchiolitis (with or without pneumonia) is the most common cause of admission in children aged under 12-months. In a Central Australian study, we described a prevalence of approximately 190 per 1000 children for RSV bronchiolitis. [1] The prevalence of all causes of bronchiolitis would indeed be higher. In our setting, coexistent pneumonia is high in Indigenous children and, at the Royal Darwin Hospital (RDH), the majority of children with bronchiolitis are also treated with antibiotics. The co-existent pneumonia is likely related to the high carriage rate and early acquisition of respiratory pathogens in Indigenous children compared to non-Indigenous children. [2] We have reviewed 100 charts of children hospitalised with bronchiolitis at the RDH and found that the readmission rate of Indigenous children for their next bronchiolitis episode within 6-months was 30% (unpublished). As the majority of these children hospitalised for bronchiolitis are retrieved from remote communities, the impact of the illness and costs plus social dislocation is significant. Furthermore recurrent lower respiratory tract infection is an independent significant risk factor for the later development of bronchiectasis [3] and lower pulmonary function in later years. [4] In addition the severity of the hospitalised episode (oxygen requirement and length of hospital stay) were also risk factors for development of bronchiectasis. [3] In our retrospective chart review we found that Indigenous infants hospitalised with bronchiolitis had more severe bronchiolitis than non-Indigenous infants (unpublished). In Indigenous infants, the severity score at presentation, number of days requiring oxygen and length of hospitalisation were all significantly worse or longer than in non-Indigenous infants (p=0.0001, 0.004, 0.001 respectively). Thus any intervention that is efficacious in reducing the severity of bronchiolitis and/or readmission for bronchiolitis in Indigenous children would be beneficial in both short and long term outcomes.
There are 2 published randomised controlled trials on RSV-bronchiolitis with contrasting results. In the Turkish study in hospitalised infants, clarithromycin was effective in reducing the length of hospital stay, severity of illness (oxygen use) as well as readmission rate in infants with moderate to severe bronchiolitis . [5] However in the European based study (primarily from Netherlands), azithromycin was not efficacious in infants hospitalised with bronchiolitis . [6] We suspect that while there are many possible reasons for the difference in efficacy, the major reason for the difference found relates to the setting ie infants in Turkey are more likely to have concomitant bacterial infection compared to the affluent European group. Childhood bronchiectasis remains a problem in Turkey [7] similar to that found in Indigenous children living in the NT . [8] It is highly likely that Indigenous infants in our setting will be similar to that of the Turkish infants. However, it is important to establish whether azithromycin is indeed efficacious in our setting given that extrapolating data from developing countries may result in poorer outcomes . [9] Bronchiolitis in NT Indigenous children is complicated by the known early colonisation of the nasopharynx by bacterial pathogens, notably Haemophilus influenzae, Moraxella catarrhalis and Streptococcus pneumoniae . [2, 10] Whilst both are macrolides, azithromycin has several benefits over clarithromycin in the Northern Territory setting. Azithromycin is active against a range of respiratory pathogens which colonise NT indigenous infants from a young age (in particular gram negative bacteria including H. influenzae). Also azithromycin is currently widely used in the Northern Territory for bronchiectasis, trachoma and sexually transmitted diseases. It has a longer half life and better tissue penetration than clarithromycin, thus requiring a much shorter treatment regime. Once weekly dosing has been shown to be sufficient for tissue effects lasting over a week. [11] As the pharmacodynamic/kinetic properties of azithromycin are superior to clarithromycin, we have elected to use azithromycin rather then clarithromycin.
Macrolides are a family of antibiotics which, in addition to antibacterial properties, possess potent anti-inflammatory properties and also influence bacterial biofilms . [ 12] Laboratory studies show that macrolides directly dampen airway inflammation by inhibiting the migration of neutrophils to the respiratory epithelium and inhibits further production of pro-inflammatory cytokines and mediators. [12] Given that acquisition and colonisation of respiratory pathogens occur very early in Indigenous infants (as early as 2 weeks) [2, 10] and current data on biofilms present in people with chronic upper respiratory infections, [13] we propose that azithromycin may be a valuable intervention for clinical outcomes of Indigenous infants hospitalised with bronchiolitis. 
All children admitted to the Paediatric ward RDH & TTH with a diagnosis of bronchiolitis will be identified and recorded on the study log. Eligibility of all children will be determined using the eligibility criteria in 4.1. Children enrolled in this study, eligible children not consented and children who do not meet the eligibility criteria will all be recorded on the study log. 
Plain-language educational tools will be used to explain the study to the primary caregiver of a clinically eligible infant. If informed consent is given the infant will be enrolled and randomised to receive either a single, oral dose of azithromycin syrup at 30mg per/kg or an equivalent volume of placebo (syrup).
1. After obtaining informed consent, complete a consent form and give a copy of this and the information sheet to the carer. 2. Complete the enrolment form and the as much of the demographic and medical history as possible from the carer. 3. Use the date of birth and Indigenous status data to determine the treatment strata. There are 4 possible strata Strata 1 Indigenous 6 months and less Strata 2
Non Indigenous 6 months and less Strata 3
Indigenous older than 6 months Strata 4
Non Indigenous older than 6 months 4. Complete a chart notification sticker and stick in the child's medical chart
This is a double-blind, randomised, placebo-controlled trial with concealed allocation. The study medications will be assigned the labels A, B, C or D (two labels assigned to placebo azithromycin and two assigned to azithromycin) by an independent person of the study at Menzies School of Health Research. Neither the study team (researchers, hospital staff) nor parents will know which treatment group (placebo or azithromycin) the infant has been assigned until the results have been analysed. Placebo azithromycin has been specifically manufactured by IDT Australia Limited (Melbourne, Victoria) and has a similar smell and taste to active azithromycin. The manufacture of placebo was 2010 2011 2012 Recruitment/follow up Microbiology Data analysis, publications, feedback to stakeholders primarily for our NHMRC funded international study on bronchiectasis in Indigenous children.
The treatment allocation list has been computer generated by using stratified block randomisation. There are 4 sheets, each corresponding to the treatment strata. Treatment allocation has been concealed by black sticker. Upon enrolment an infant will be assigned to the next treatment on the appropriate stratified list and the treatment (A, B, C or D) revealed.
1. After identifying the correct strata write the child's name and HRN on the next available line. The number refers to the child's study identification number. 2. Remove the sticker to reveal the study medication allocation (letter A, B, C or D). Record this on the child's chart notification sticker and on the enrolment form. 3. Treating physician to complete ABIS script to order medication/placebo on medication chart (dose 30mg/kg). Medication scripts are found in the study documents and are given to physician by ABIS study staff. 4. ABIS script taken to pharmacy by ABIS study staff and medication dispensed. 5. Take medication back to the paediatric ward and inform the nurse looking after the child that the child has been enrolled in the study. 6. For children enrolled on the weekends, please ensure that scripts are taken down to the Pharmacy before 1000hrs to ensure the pharmacy has enough time to dispense. Administer/supervise administration of first dose of medication.
Nasopharyngeal swabs a) One nasopharyngeal swab is obtained prior to the administration of the study medication. A second nasopharyngeal swab is obtained 48 hours post administration of study medication. The swabs are stored in separate vials of STGGB medium and stored at -70 degrees prior to dispatch to the Menzies laboratory for processing.
We plan to enrol 100 infants total. Children will be stratified by age (6 months and less and over 6 months), Indigenous status (Indigenous and non Indigenous) and site (Darwin and Townsville). The mean length of stay for bronchiolitis at Royal Darwin Hospital is 96 hours. To detect a mean difference of 24 hours in length of stay between treatment groups with an alpha of 0.05 and a power of 90%, the required sample size is 23 infants per group.
Participation in the study is completely voluntary. A participant may choose to refuse to participate in the study. Parents will be reassured that the care of their child will not be compromised in any way by not participating.
Participation in the study is completely voluntary. A participant may choose to withdraw at any stage without giving reason.
Children enrolled in this study will be managed by hospital staff according to standard clinical practice for the management of bronchiolitis. They are not exempt from receiving any care or management protocol specified by the attending physician.
A standardised sheet will be used to collect clinical data. Demographic information and medical history will be obtained from the primary care-giver and from hospital records. The primary and secondary outcome measures (described below) will be monitored from the medical chart until the acute study end-point has been reached (defined as >16 hours off supplemental oxygen and infant is feeding well). Clinical assessment data includes oxygen requirement and level, physiological measurements for clinical severity score (respiratory rate, accessory muscle use, degree of wheeze), other physiological measurement (temperature, heart rate), requirement for other therapies (IV fluids, nutrition, antibiotics). In addition routine investigatory parameters (FBC and chest x-ray findings) will be recorded.
Swabs for microbiological analysis are stored in STGGB at -70 (in accordance with WHO guidelines). Presence of Haemophilus influenzae, Moraxella catarrhalis and Streptococcus pneumoniae will be identified using culture methods established in the Menzies laboratory. The antibiotic resistance phenotype will also be determined pre and post study medication administration.
Additionally, nucleic acids will be extracted from 0.2 ml of each nasopharyngeal swab specimen using the High Pure Viral Nucleic Acid kit (Roche Diagnostics, Australia), according to the manufacturer's instructions. Monospecific PCR and reverse transcriptase PCR (RT-PCR) method will be used to detect Mycoplasma pneumoniae, Chlamydia pneumoniae [14] , coronaviruses [15] , bocavirus [16] and human metapneumovirus (hMPV) [17, 18, 19] whereas multiplex PCR and RT-PCR will be used to detect adenovirus, parainfluenza (1, 2 3), influenza (A and B), and respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) [20, 21] . These methods have been previously validated in the QLD Paediatric Infectious Disease Laboratory.
NPA collected in the standard clinical manner will be frozen at -80°C. Upon thawing nucleic acids will be extracted from 0.2 ml of each NPA specimen using the High Pure Viral Nucleic Acid kit (Roche Diagnostics, Australia), according to the manufacturer's instructions. Monospecific PCR and reverse transcriptase PCR (RT-PCR) method will be used to detect Mycoplasma pneumoniae, Chlamydia pneumoniae [14] , coronaviruses [15] , bocavirus [16] and human metapneumovirus (hMPV) [17, 18, 19] whereas multiplex PCR and RT-PCR will be used to detect adenovirus, parainfluenza (1, 2 3), influenza (A and B), and respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) [20, 21] . These methods have been previously validated in the QLD Paediatric Infectious Disease Laboratory.
Data analysis 4.8.1 Primary outcome: length of stay for bronchiolitis episode. The primary outcome (length of hospital stay) will be compared between infants receiving placebo or azithromycin using non-parametric analysis. Data within the Indigenous status will be analysed separately.
Length of time on supplemental oxygen; readmission to hospital within 6 months of this episode. All clinical secondary outcomes and laboratory data will also be analysed using non-parametric analysis. Categorical data will be compared using Chi square (or Fishers Exact).
All information collected from study participants will be treated as strictly confidential and accessibly by study personnel only. Data will be stored in a restricted-access building at TTH and then sent to Menzies School of Health Research in a locked filing cabinet or password-protected electronic database. Study participants will be issued with a numerical code and will not be identifiable in any publications. Data will be stored for 15 years or until the child reaches the age of 25 (whichever is greater).
Samples to be used for research purposes (nasopharyngeal swab and nasopharyngeal aspirate) will be processed and stored in the restricted-access PC2 laboratory of Menzies School of Health Research by trained study personnel. Samples sent to the QPID laboratory for analysis will be transported by courier and will be identified by numerical code only.
6 Quality control/quality assurance This study will be conducted in accordance with the NHMRC Guidelines on Ethical Matters in Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Health Research, the Note for Guidance on Good Clinical Practice and the Declaration of Helsinki. Ethics approval and Clinical Trial Protocol committee reviews for the protocols and subsequent amendments will be sought prior to implementation.
Adequately trained and experienced personnel will be employed for trial related activities. This will be documented by way Curriculum Vitae to be kept at Menzies School of Health Research.
Safety profile, as measured by the incidence, intensity, and relationship to study drug of adverse events and serious adverse events.
An adverse event is any untoward medical occurrence experienced by the participant while undergoing treatment in a clinical trial, and up to one week after the dose of Study medicine. Adverse events include temporary, moderate discomfort and disability to the participant.
A serious adverse event is defined as any event that is fatal or life threatening is permanently disabling to the participant, any admission to hospital, or an overdose that requires additional medical management
Side effects of Azithromycin are rare. Those listed in MIMS Annual 2001 included: nausea, vomiting, diarrhoea, or abdominal pain. Rare but potentially serious side effects listed are angioedema and cholestatic jaundice.
The children enrolled in the study have been admitted to TTH and RDH and as such are monitored according to hospital protocol. The child's progress is monitored daily by the study staff via the medical chart and the Nursing Unit Manager. 6.4 Classification and reporting of serious adverse events All SAEs will be investigated and assessed to determine whether the event was caused by administration of a study medicine. Causality will be assessed against the definitions below, which are based on standard WHO criteria.
All SAEs will be investigated by the Chief Investigator in consultation with the Independent Safety Monitor. Causality will be assigned using the above definitions. The findings of each investigation will be reported to the Independent Safety Monitor within the time periods specified above in a standard format (see SAE Brief Case Summary).
SAEs with a causality classification of "very likely/certain", "probable" or "possible" must also be reported to the Chief Investigator and Chair of the DSMB within 24 hours of the determination. 
The DSMB is an independent group of experts that advises the study investigators. The members of the DSMB serve in an individual capacity and provide their expertise and recommendations to guide the clinical trial. An elected member of the DSMB will become the independent safety monitor of the study.
The DSMB, unblinded, will review all events (i.e. mild, moderate, severe or lifethreatening events), whether they are related or unrelated to the administration of study drug. The DSMB will meet in person or via telephone link up at the start of the trial and on a six-monthly basis after that. The DSMB will also review any Serious Adverse Event in an expeditious manner as they are reported.
A voting member of the DSMB, this position is the primary DSMB contact for serious adverse event reporting Liases with the Chief Investigator and health care provider to ensure best standard of care is provided for participant. Reviews the classification of SAEs and directs further investigations as necessary.
Provides advice on further information required to assign causality.
Publication and reporting of results and outcomes of this trial will be in accordance with Menzies Publication Policy. Publication of results will be subjected to fair peer-review. Authorship will be given to all persons providing significant input into the conception, design, and execution or reporting of the research according to Menzies Statement of Record Integrity.
No person who is an author, consistent with this definition, will be excluded as an author without their permission in writing. Authorship will be discussed between researchers prior to study commencement (or as soon as possible thereafter) and reviewed whenever there are changes in participation. All conflicts arising through disputes about authorship will be reviewed by the Menzies director. Acknowledgement will be given to collaborating institutions and hospitals and other individuals and organizations providing finance or facilities.
Annual reports will be submitted to the appropriate Human Research Ethics Committee.
Regular study progress reports will be made available to the clinical and nursing staff of Royal Darwin Hospital and TTH
A final report will be made available to all stakeholders including Royal Darwin Hospital, Menzies School of Health Research, funding bodies and the HREC. No study participant will be individually identifiable in any publication, written or oral. Infants to 18 months of age will be involved in the study. The study will be explained verbally to the child's carer based on the information sheet and consent flipchart. Parents/guardians will sign a consent form.
The carer of eligible children will be fully informed about the study, the data collection, procedures and possible risks involved in taking the study medication (azithromycin or placebo). Nasopharyngeal swab will be collected by a trained member of the study team. The nasopharyngeal aspirate is performed as part of hospital management for bronchiolitis and is performed by hospital staff. Azithromycin is currently being used in the Northern Territory in children with chronic suppurative lung disease.
This trial was registered with the Australian and New Zealand Clinical Trials register on the 28 March 2008 (ACTRN12608000150347).