Table S1: Definitions Variable/Parameter Definition β Infection rate or infection probability. γ Recovery rate. t r Recovery time.
T Transmissibility.
θ t Probability that a neighbor of a root node has not transmitted yet the disease to the root node at time t.
Φ S (t) Probability that a neighbor of a root node is susceptible at time t.
Φ I (t) Probability that an infected neighbor of a root node has not transmitted the disease to the root node at time t.
Φ R (t) Probability that a neighbor is recovered at time t without having transmitted the disease to the root node.
In the EBCM approach, θ t is the probability that a root node has not being infected by a neighbor at time t. This is possible if the neighbor is susceptible, recovered, or infected but has not transmitted the disease yet to the root, which happens with probabilities Φ S (t), Φ R (t) and Φ I (t), respectively. Then, θ t = Φ S (t) + Φ I (t) + Φ R (t). The probability that a root node of connectivity k is susceptible is θ k and the fraction of susceptible nodes is S(t) = k P (k)θ k t = G 0 (θ t ). On the other hand, a neighbor is susceptible with probability Φ S (t) = G 1 (θ t ). Then in the SIR model with infection and recovery rates [1, 2] , the probabilities Φ I (t), Φ S (t) and θ t evolve as,
where β and γ are the infection and recovered rates. Eq. (S1) represents the decrease of θ when an infected neighbor transmits the disease. The Eq. (S2) represents the decrease of Φ S when a susceptible neighbor is infected, which is proportional to G ′ 1 (θ), i.e., the mean connectivity of the susceptible first neighbors or the excess degree of the susceptible individuals, because when a susceptible individual is infected, all its links except the one used to infected it, can transmit the disease. This term contributes to an increase of Φ I in Eq. (S3). In Eq. (S3) on the r.h.s, the first term represents the decrease of Φ I when the links transmit the disease, the second term corresponds to the term of Eq. (S2) mentioned above and the third term represents the decrease of Φ I due to the recovery of infected individuals.
To obtain the evolution of I(t), we use the fact that,
, the evolution of the fraction of infected individuals is given byİ
where the first term represents the decrease of S which is proportional to β, the mean connectivity of susceptible individuals G ′ 0 (θ) and the probability that an outgoing edge from a root is connected with an infected node that has not transmitted the disease to the root at time t. The second term corresponds to the recovery of infected individuals at a rate γ.
We reformulate the EBCM approach process with discrete time steps, for a fixed recovery time t r . It is straightforward that Eq. (S1-S5) can be written as,
where 1 − T = (1 − β) tr denotes the probability that an infected individual has not transmitted the disease to a susceptible individual during t r time units since he was infected. Finally the evolution of the fraction of infected individuals is given by 
In node void percolation, as a link is traversed, void node is removed. The void nodes are removed with probability proportional to kP (k). As the susceptible nodes can be mapped into void node percolation, the susceptible network loses their higher degree nodes first as in an intentional attack. As a consequence, the resulting susceptible network is more homogeneous than the original. Thus, mean field exponents of a second order percolating phase transition [6] are expected. In order to show the effect of the disease spreading on the highest degree nodes, in Fig. S2 we plot for a SF network the effective degree distribution of the susceptible nodes obtained from the simulations, in which a susceptible node has degree k when it has k susceptible neighbors. As shown in Fig. S2 , as the disease spreads, the effective degree distribution loses the heavy tail. As a result of this process, the susceptible clusters becomes more sparse and at the critical time t c the topology of the susceptible clusters change drastically since the susceptible individuals lose all the hubs and P (k) has an exponential tail. For percolation in mean field it is known that at the criticality the finite cluster size distribution n S ∼ s −τ with τ = 2.5 and Fig. S3 we plot the simulations results of the finite size distribution of the susceptible nodes n s at t = t c . We can see that at t c , n s (t c ) behaves as a power law with exponent τ ≈ 2.5 which corresponds to the mean field value, independently of the initial degree distribution of the network [7] . Similarly, in Fig. S4 we plot S 1 (t) as a function of Φ S (t) obtained from the simulations and the theoretical approach. We compute Φ S (t) from the simulations as the square root of the fraction of edges connecting two susceptible nodes [8] . We can see that S 1 (t) behaves as a power law with exponent one with the distance to the criticality Φ s (t c ), which also corresponds to the mean field value (see Insets of Fig. S4 ). Since two critical exponents are sufficient to determine the universality class, the results showed above indicate that in a node void percolation process the susceptible network belongs to the same universality class of mean field percolation and confirms quantitatively the homogenization of the susceptible network during a SIR epidemic spreading.
Finally, in Fig. S5 , we plot the critical time t c , computed from the simulations at Φ S (t) = V s c , as a function of T for different values of t r . We can see that for the same transmissibility T , when t r increase, the time to intervene grows since β decrease and thus the disease spreading is retarded. In turn, when the transmissibility T reaches T * from above, the critical time t c grows very fast. This phenomenon is analogous to other second order phase transitions in physics like the relaxation time near the Curie temperature, which are called "critical slowing down" [9, 10] , and indicates that that once the transmissibility increases slightly above T * , the time needed to destroy the giant susceptible cluster decreases very fast. 