Metal-based drugs with extensive clinical applications hold great promise for the development of cancer chemotherapeutic agents. In the last few decades, Schiff bases and their complexes have become well known for their extensive biological potential. In the present study, we examined the antiproliferative effect of a copper (II) complex on HT-29 colon cancer cells. The Cu(BrHAP) 2 Schiff base compound demonstrated a potent antiproliferative effect in HT-29 cells, with an IC 50 value of 2.87 g/ml after 72 h of treatment. HT-29 cells treated with Cu (II) complexes underwent apoptosis death, as exhibited by a progressive elevation in the proportion of the G 1 cell population. At a concentration of 6.25 g/ml, the Cu(BrHAP) 2 compound caused significant elevation in ROS production following perturbation of mitochondrial membrane potential and cytochrome c release, as assessed by the measurement of fluorescence intensity in stained cells. Furthermore, the activation of caspases 3/7 and 9 was part of the Cu (II) complex-induced apoptosis, which confirmed the involvement of mitochondrial-mediated apoptosis. Meanwhile, there was no significant activation of caspase-8. Taken together, these results imply that the Cu(BrHAP) 2 compound is a potential candidate for further in vivo and clinical colon cancer studies to develop novel chemotherapeutic agents derived from metal-based agents.
Cancer is a debilitating disease that afflicts a substantial portion of the world population in all generations and is a major health problem of global concern [1] . Among the various types of cancer, colorectal cancer is the second and third most prevalent cancer among males and females in the United States, respectively. In spite of all the considerable progress in protective methods and recent improvements in screening techniques and chemotherapy, the 1-year and 5-year relative survival rates for patients suffering from colorectal cancer are 83.2% and 64.3%, respectively [2] . In addition, due to bitter controversy over optimal methods for early detection, full compliance of patients with screening recommendations remains a major hindrance for diagnosis at the early stages of cancer development. Development of resistance to chemotherapy also represents a critical issue for which simultaneous treatment with various classes of therapeutics to reduce the resistance has yielded some success [3] . Moreover, the numerous side effects of chemotherapeutic drugs on cancer patients, including hair loss, diarrhea, bleeding, and immunosuppression, have made the process 2
The Scientific World Journal of treatment more complicated [4] . The highly regulated programmed cell death process of apoptosis is a matter of great interest in oncology and cancer therapy and represents a common molecular pathway for drug resistance and carcinogenesis [5] .
Maintenance of a constant cell number in the colonic mucosa is highly regulated through the balance between apoptosis and cell proliferation. The perturbation in this balance leads to an escape from normal cell number homeostasis and is associated with the progression of cancer cells [6, 7] . Thus, suppression of proliferation and elevation of apoptosis in these aberrant cells are suggested to be the essential mechanism for the inhibition of colon cancer. Furthermore, apoptosis and the factors involved in its mechanism of action also present a window that can be exploited for the improvement of potential therapeutic agents with high effectiveness and less adverse side effects [8] . Hence, screening for novel compounds capable of inducing apoptosis in colon cancer cells that can be used alone or in combination with other chemotherapeutic drugs is a significant need and represents a critical challenge in medicinal chemistry.
Metal complexes have been extensively utilized in clinics for centuries and have attracted numerous inorganic chemists to analyze them, with the main focus being medical applications [9, 10] . Copper, an essential trace element with an oxidative nature and bioessential activity in human metabolism, does not exist in an ionic form in biological systems. Thus, measurement of copper in the body is evaluated in the form of complexes with organic compounds [11] . Schiff bases are a critical class of compounds in medical chemistry that have demonstrated significant chemotherapeutic and antibacterial application [12, 13] . Schiff base Cu(II) complexes revealed great potential for antiproliferative, antibacterial, and gastroprotective activity [14] [15] [16] [17] [18] . This study evaluated the anticancer potential of a copper (II) complex derived from N,N -dimethyl ethylene diamine and 2-hydroxyacetophenone Schiff base ligand, Cu(BrHAP) 2 . Furthermore, the possible apoptotic mechanism underlying this activity was also examined. Dulbecco's Modified Eagle Medium (DMEM, Life Technologies, Inc., Rockville, MD) containing 10% fetal bovine serum, 100 g/mL streptomycin, and 100 U/mL penicillin G at 37 ∘ C in a humidified atmosphere of 5% CO 2 /95% air. The cells were plated at a fitting density in tissue culture flasks (Corning, USA) according to each experimental scale. Cell viability was measured by a conventional MTT [3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2yl)-2,5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide] reduction assay. After 48 h exposure to six concentrations of Cu(BrHAP) 2 , cells were treated with MTT solution (2 mg/mL) for 2 h. The dark formazan crystals formed in intact cells were dissolved in DMSO, and the absorbance was measured at 570 nm and 650 nm as a background using a microplate reader (Hidex, Turku, Finland). The IC 50 value was determined as the concentration of Cu(BrHAP) 2 required to reduce the absorbance of treated cells to 50% of the DMSO-treated control cells. All samples were prepared in triplicates.
Assay. Measurement of lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) release is a biomarker for determining the cytotoxicity of a compound. Briefly, HT-29 cells were treated with different concentrations of Cu(BrHAP) 2 and Triton X-100 (positive control) for 48 h, and the supernatants of the untreated and treated cells were transferred to a new 96-well plate for LDH activity analysis. Next, 100 L of LDH reaction solution was added to each well, the plate was incubated at room temperature for 30 min, and the absorbance was read at 490 nm using a Tecan Infinite 200 Pro (Tecan, Männedorf, Switzerland) microplate reader. The amount of formazan salt and intensity of red color in treated and untreated samples were represented as the LDH activity of cells. The LDH release level in cells treated with Cu(BrHAP) 2 was expressed as a percentage of the positive control.
A propidium iodide (PI) and acridine orange (AO) double staining assay were carried out for detection of apoptosis in the treated cells using a fluorescent microscope (Leica attached with Q-Floro software) according to a standard procedure. HT-29 cells (5 × 10 4 cells/mL in a 25 mL culture flask) were plated, treated with Cu(BrHAP) 2 at the IC 50 concentration, and incubated for 24, 48, and 72 h. After harvesting the cells, they were stained with fluorescent dyes and observed under a UV-fluorescent microscope (Olympus BX51) within 30 min.
In brief, HT-29 cells (1 × 10 4 cells/well in 96-well plate) were supplemented with Cu(BrHAP) 2 (2 g/mL) or DMSO (negative control) for 24 h. The live cells were then incubated with BrdU and Phospho-Histone H3 dyes for 30 min. After the cells were fixed and stained as described by the manufacturer's instructions, they were visualized and analyzed using the Cellomics ArrayScan HCS reader (Thermo Scientific). The fluorescence intensities of the dyes were measured using a target activation bioapplication module.
To confirm the result of the fluorescence cell cycle analysis, HT-29 cells (5 × 10 4 cells/mL) were treated with Cu(BrHAP) 2 for 24, 48, and 72 h for flow cytometry analysis. After incubation, HT-29 cells were spun down at 1800 rpm for 5 min. Next, fixation of a cell population for flow cytometry analysis was carried out to restore integrity. In brief, the cell pellets were fixed by mixing them with 700 L of cold ethanol (90%) and were then kept at 4 ∘ C overnight. Treated HT-29 cells were spun down, and the ethanol was discarded. After washing and suspending the cells in PBS, 25 L of RNase A (10 mg/mL) and 50 L of propidium iodide (PI) (1 mg/mL) were added to the fixed cells for 1 h at 37 ∘ C. The added RNase A limited the ability of PI to bind to only DNA molecules. At the end, the DNA content of the cells was analyzed by a flow cytometer (BD FACSCanto II).
The oxygen radical antioxidant capacity (ORAC) assay was carried out based on the protocols described in detail previously [19] . In brief, Cu(BrHAP) 2 at the concentration of 100 g/mL was used for this assay in a total reaction volume of 200 L. The experiment was performed in a black 96-well microplate with 25 L of compound, blank (solvent/PBS), standard (trolox), or positive control (quercetin). The plate was then supplemented with the working fluorescein solution (150 L), followed by a 5 min incubation at 37 ∘ . The total volume of 200 L was made up by adding 25 L of AAPH working solution. Fluorescence intensity was measured at an excitation wavelength of 485 nm and an emission wavelength of 538 nm every 2 min for 2 h. The result was quantified by calculating the differences of area under the fluorescence decay curve (AUC) of samples and blank. The values were Trolox equivalents (TE).
In brief, HT-29 cells (1 × 10 4 cells/mL) were seeded in 96-well plates and treated with different concentrations of Cu(BrHAP) 2 and DMSO (negative control) for 24 h. After 30 min treatment with dihydroethidium (DHE) dye, cells were fixed and washed with wash buffer as described by the manufacturer's instructions. In the presence of superoxides, DHE dye is oxidized to ethidium. The fluorescence intensity was determined by a fluorescent plate reader at an extension wavelength of 520 nm and an emission wavelength of 620 nm.
The critical factors for monitoring the cell health, namely, cell loss, changes in cell permeability, cytochrome release, mitochondrial membrane potential changes, nuclear size, and morphological changes, were studied using a Cellomics Multiparameter Cytotoxicity 3 Kit as described in detail previously [20] . Plates with stained cells were analyzed using the ArrayScan HCS system (Cellomics, PA, USA).
Caspases 3/7, -8, and 9 activities were determined using the commercial caspase-Glo 3/7, 8, and 9 assay kit (Promega, Madison, WI). HT-29 cells (1.0 × 10 4 cells/well) were seeded overnight in white-walled 96-well plates and treated with different concentrations of Cu(BrHAP) 2 for 24 h. According to the manufacturer's protocol, the treated cells were supplemented with caspase-Glo reagent (100 L) and incubated at room temperature for 30 min. The active caspases from apoptotic cells caused the cleavage of aminoluciferin-labeled synthetic tetrapeptide, leading to the release of substrate for the luciferase enzyme. Caspase activities were analyzed using a Tecan Infinite 200 Pro (Tecan, Männedorf, Switzerland) microplate reader.
In brief, HT-29 cells (1.0 × 10 4 cells/well in a 96-well plate) were treated with different concentrations of Cu(BrHAP) 2 for 3 h, followed by stimulation with TNF-(1 ng/mL) for 30 min. After discarding the medium, cells were fixed and stained using a Cellomics nucleus factor-B (NF-B) activation kit (Thermo Scientific) according to the manufacturer's instructions. Next, an Array Scan HCS Reader was used for evaluation of the plate. Cytoplasmic and nuclear NF-B intensity ratios were calculated using Cytoplasm to Nucleus Translocation Bioapplication software. The average intensity of 200 cells/well was determined. The ratios for untreated, treated, and TNF-stimulated cells were compared.
All the experiments were performed at least three times independently. The results were presented as the mean ± standard deviation (SD) of the number of experiments shown in the legends. An analysis of variance (ANOVA) was carried out using the prism statistical package (GraphPad Software, USA). < 0.05 was considered statistically significant.
Cells of the Colon. Initially, the cytotoxicity of Cu(BrHAP) 2 was tested on HT-29 and CCD 841 cell lines. The IC 50 values of the Schiff base compound were determined based on the result collected from three independent MTT experiments. As indicated in Table 1 , Cu(BrHAP) 2 elicited a significant cytotoxicity and cell inhibitory effect after 24, 48, and 72 h of treatment on HT-29 cell. 2 -Induced LDH Release. Lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) release in the medium is a marker that shows the loss of membrane integrity, apoptosis, or necrosis. The cytotoxicity of the Cu(BrHAP) 2 compound, as determined by the LDH release assay, was quantified on HT-29 cells treated with various concentrations of the Schiff base compound for 48 h. Cu(BrHAP) 2 induced a significant elevation in LDH release, demonstrating cytotoxicity at the 6.25 and 12.5 g/mL concentrations compared to the control cells ( Figure 2 ).
Microscopy and AO/PI Double Staining. Morphological changes in HT-29 cells treated with Cu(BrHAP) 2 compound were observed under a fluorescent microscope at 24, 48, and 72 h. The cells were scored under a fluorescent microscope to analyze viable cells, early apoptosis, and late apoptosis. Early apoptosis, defined as intervening AO within the fragmented DNA, was observed under bright green fluorescence. At the same time, control cells were visualized with a green intact nuclear structure. After 24 and 48 h of treatment with Cu(BrHAP) 2 , moderate apoptosis was observed in the form of blebbing and nuclear chromatin condensation. Furthermore, in the late stage of apoptosis, changes, such as the presence of a reddish-orange color due to binding of PI to denatured DNA, were observed after 72 h of treatment ( Figure 3) . The results showed that the Cu(BrHAP) 2 compound induced morphological features of apoptosis in a time-dependent manner. Figure 4 , demonstrated that there is no cell cycle arrest in the S/M phases. The lack of cell cycle arrest in the S/M phases suggested possible cell cycle arrest in the G 1 /G 2 phases. To determine the exact arrested phase, treated HT-29 cells were analyzed for cell cycle progression using flow cytometry. As expected, there was no significant arrest in the S/M phases. Meanwhile, significant cell cycle arrest in the G 1 phase was observed for HT-29 cells after 24 and 48 h of treatment ( Figure 5 ).
Assay. Antioxidant capacity was measured by ORAC assay, which is the only assay that involves the use of peroxyl radical as a prooxidant and quantifies activity via the area under the curve (AUC) technique. In our experiment, quercetin was used as a positive control. The result demonstrated that Cu(BrHAP) 2 exhibited low to moderate antioxidant activity compared to quercetin ( Table 2) .
Formation. HT-29 cells were treated with different concentrations of Cu(BrHAP) 2 for 24 h and stained with DHE dye to determine the influence of the Schiff base compound on ROS production. The fluorescence intensities of DHE oxidization by ROS were quantified using a fluorescence microplate reader. As depicted in Figure 6 , exposure to the Schiff base compound caused a significant elevation in the ROS levels of treated HT-29 cells at the 6.25 g/mL concentration.
To investigate the induction of apoptosis by Cu(BrHAP) 2 , nuclear morphological changes in HT-29 cells were analyzed by detection of nuclear condensation. As shown in Figure 7 , Hoechst 33342 staining demonstrated that nuclear condensation, which is directly related to apoptotic chromatin changes, emerged in some cells after treatment with Cu(BrHAP) 2 . Meanwhile, the permeability of treated cells was also elevated. Mitochondria are the main source for the production of ROS and adenosine triphosphate (ATP) and are critical in controlling the death and survival of cells. The reduction in fluorescence intensity depicted in Figure 6 Cu(BrHAP) 2 triggered the translocation of cytochrome from mitochondria into the cytosol during apoptosis in HT-29 cells.
Activation. The elevation in ROS production associated with a collapse in MMP may lead to the activation of the caspase cascade. To investigate caspase activation, the bioluminescent intensities representing caspases 3/7, 8, and 9 activities were quantified in HT-29 cells treated with different concentrations of Cu(BrHAP) 2 for 24 h. As shown in Figure 8 , significant elevation in the activity of caspase-3/7 at the 6.25 g/mL concentration and caspase-9 at the 6.25 and 12.5 g/mL concentrations was observed in Cu(BrHAP) 2treated cells, while no significant change in the activity of caspase-8 was detected between treated and untreated HT-29 cells. Thus, the apoptosis induced by the Schiff base compound in HT-29 cells is possibly mediated via the intrinsic pathway, but not the extrinsic pathway.
is a transcription factor that has a critical role in cytokine gene expression. NF-B activation and translocation to the nucleus to enable DNA-binding activity and facilitate target gene expression are mediated by inflammatory cytokines such as tumor necrosis factor-(TNF-). The Cu(BrHAP) 2 Schiff base compound did not exhibit any inhibitory effect on translocation of TNF--stimulated NF-B in HT-29 treated cells, and TNF--stimulation led to NF-B translocation from the cytoplasm to the nucleus (Figure 9 ).
Carcinogenesis is a multistage process in which unregulated cell proliferation as well as a reduction in apoptosis incidence serves as initial characterizations for its progression [21] . One of the defense procedures in multicellular organisms is the destruction of undesirable cell development, which is defined as programmed cell death. Apoptosis is the most noticed programmed cell death mechanism and is characterized by distinct morphological changes such as membrane permeability, cell shrinkage, disruption of the mitochondrial membrane, and chromatin condensation [22, 23]. The disruption of cellular homeostasis between cell death and cell proliferation leads to cancer incidence [24] , and agents that can induce apoptosis are known to have potential anticancer effects [25, 26] . Apoptosis pathways are effective targets for cancer therapy as well as chemoprevention. Numerous chemopreventive drugs have been determined to regulate key events or molecules in apoptosis-inducing signal transduction pathways [27] . In the present study, the Cu(BrHAP) 2 Schiff base compound was evaluated for its ability to inhibit the growth of HT-29 cells using an MTT assay. HT-29 cells have recently been characterized as a suitable model for colon cancer studies [28] [29] [30] . human colon cancer cells in a time-and dose-dependent manner. Meanwhile, the nontumorigenic colon cell line (CCD 841) showed no cytotoxicity after treatment with the compound. The cytotoxic effect of the Cu(II) compound was also confirmed by measuring the level of LDH release from treated cells. Considerably elevated LDH release showed that the cytotoxicity of the Cu(BrHAP) 2 compound possibly occurred via the loss of membrane integrity, whether through activation of apoptosis or the necrosis pathway [31] . The observation of early apoptosis and late apoptosis by fluorescent microscopy analysis and AO/PI double staining following treatment of HT-29 cells with the compound included some signs of apoptosis, namely, cytoplasmic shrinkage, membrane blebbing, and DNA fragmentation [32, 33] . We found that the number of cells with early apoptosis features was higher at earlier stages of treatment. However, when treatment time increased to 72 h, late apoptosis or necrosis characterizations were dominant among treated HT-29 cells. Concurrent detection of late apoptosis or necrosis is scientifically possible because treated HT-29 cells undergoing apoptosis may have progressed into necrosis due to the prolonged incubation with the Schiff base compound.
To elucidate the mechanisms underlying the observed antiproliferative effect of the Cu(II) complex on cancer cells, cell cycle distribution was analyzed using BrdU and Phospho-Histone H3 staining along with flow cytometry [34] [35] [36] . BrdU dye can attach to the synthesized DNA of replicating cells during the S phase of the cell cycle, while Phospho-Histone H3 dye stains cells in different mitotic stages. The cell cycle results from the BrdU and Phospho-Histone H3 double staining assay indicated that there were no significant changes in the number of cells in the S/M phases after the exposure of HT-29 cells to the Schiff base compound. This result suggests the possibility that the cells were arrested in the G 1 or G 2 phase of the cell cycle. Thus, the flow cytometry analysis of the cell cycle was performed to determine the exact arrested phase, and the results demonstrated significant cell cycle arrest at G 1 after 24 and 48 h of treatment, suggesting proliferative suppression via induction of apoptosis [37, 38] .
Perturbation of mitochondrial membrane potential is one of the earliest intracellular events that occur following the induction of apoptosis [39] . As the main source of cellular ROS and adenosine triphosphate (ATP), mitochondria are the key regulators of mechanisms controlling the survival or death of cells. After confirming that the Cu(BrHAP) 2 Schiff base compound did not have significant antioxidant capacity in HT-29 cancer cells using the ORAC assay, the induction of ROS production in treated cells was analyzed. According to our study, after exposing the Cu(II) compound to HT-29 cells and analyzing the levels of ROS, it was demonstrated that the level of ROS in treated HT-29 cells was significantly elevated at a compound concentration of 6.25 g/mL.
In metal-induced apoptosis, the mitochondria have the crucial role in mediating apoptosis through metal-induced ROS [40] . The intrinsic or mitochondrial-dependent signaling pathway involves different factors of nonreceptor-mediated stimuli that induce intracellular signals. These signals, mainly through the p53 protein, act on the mitochondrialinitiated events. Excessive ROS production is a negative signal that can result in the failure of suppression of antiapoptotic factors, thereby triggering apoptosis. Therefore, we used mitochondrial membrane potential (MMP) fluorescent probes to examine the effect of elevated ROS production on the function of mitochondria in treated HT-29 cells. As shown in Figure 7 , changes in MMP after treatment with the Cu(BrHAP) 2 Schiff base compound leading to the membrane depolarization of the mitochondria were demonstrated by Rhodamine 123 release to the cytoplasm from the mitochondria matrix. The result implies that the induction of apoptosis by Cu(II) Schiff base complexes may be associated with the mitochondrial pathway [26, 41, 42] . One of the important signals to initiate the procedure of apoptosis is cytosolic cytochrome . The release of cytochrome into the cytosol and reduction of its levels in the mitochondria have been shown to occur as a result of changes in MMP [30] . As the result illustrated, the synthetic Schiff base compound also led to an increase in the level of cytochrome in the cytosol compared to the control.
The excessive production of ROS from mitochondria and the collapse of MMP may activate the downstream caspase molecules and consequently lead to apoptotic cell death. After the binding of cytochrome to apoptotic activating factor-1, caspase-9 is activated via apoptosome formation, which leads to active caspase-3/7, the most effective caspase with many cellular targets [43] . In the extrinsic pathway, apoptosis is mediated by death receptors. As an example, FAS ligand interacts with the FAS receptor, leading to the activation of caspase-8 [44] . Caspase-8 activation cleaves and activates downstream executioner caspases such as caspase-3/7 [45, 46] . In our study, the Cu(BrHAP) 2 schiff base compound induced significant elevation in the caspases 3/7 and 9 activities compared to the control. Meanwhile, there was no activation of caspase-8, suggesting that the apoptosis induced in HT-29 cells was mediated via the intrinsic mitochondrial pathway but not the extrinsic, death receptor-linked caspase-8 pathway.
The supporting evidence of LDH release, ROS production, MMP suppression, elevation in the level of cytochrome , and activation of caspases 3/7 and 9 demonstrated the promising anticancer activity of the Cu(BrHAP) 2 Schiff base compound against the HT-29 colon cancer cell line via the intrinsic mitochondrial pathway.