For each tree the protein used for phylogenetic reconstruction is indicated on the top-left (N: nucleoprotein; P: phosphoprotein; M: matrix protein; F: fusion protein; SH: small hydrophobic protein; G: glycoprotein; L: polymerase). Officially assigned viral sub-groups are indicated by letters (A1-2, B1-2 for HMPV, A-D for AMPV), while recently identified viruses that lack official taxonomic designation are indicated by circles with the virus identified in this study (GuMPV B29) indicated by the filled green circle. In each tree the amino acid identities of GuMPV B29 compared to the two different viral groups included in color-coded boxes are indicated. The trees were built with the maximum likelihood method (Felsenstein, 1981) LG model (Le and Gascuel, 2008) ; G, M2-1, N, SH: JTT model (Jones et al., 1992) ; P: WG model (Whelan and Goldman, 2001) ). A discrete Gamma distribution was used to model evolutionary rate differences among sites (for all trees except for M2-2) and the rate variation model allowed for some sites to be evolutionarily invariable (for G, L, M2-2). Branch lengths are proportional to genetic distances as indicated by the scale bar, and the outcome of the bootstrap analysis (Felsenstein, 1985) is shown next to the nodes. Figure S2 . Alignment of the 207 amino acid tandem repeat identified in the nsp3 region of the 1a ORF of GuCoV B29. Each 23 amino acid long repetitive sequence is identified by a number (1 to 9) that corresponds to its position in the genome. Both the nucleotide and the corresponding predicted amino acid sequences are provided as consensus sequences; agreements with these sequences are indicated by dots, while variations identified in each repeat are indicated by one or three-letter codes for nucleotides and amino acids, respectively. Figure S3 . Phylogenetic analyses of gammacoronaviruses. The trees are based on amino acid sequences of the two conserved replicase domains (ADRP and 3CL pro ) and the whole available 1a ORF of viruses within the genus Gammacoronavirus (SW1: beluga whale coronavirus; BdCoV: bottlenose dolphin coronavirus; IBV: infectious bronchitis virus; TCoV: turkey coronavirus; GfCoV: Guinea fowl coronavirus; DdCoV: dominant-duck coronavirus; GuCoV: gull coronavirus; CGCoV: Canada goose coronavirus). Recently identified viruses that lack official taxonomic designation are indicated by circles with the virus identified in this study (GuCoV B29) indicated by a filled green circle. In each tree the amino acid identities of GuCoV B29 compared to the three different avian viral groups included in color-coded boxes are indicated. The trees were built with the maximum likelihood method (Felsenstein, 1981 ) using MEGA 7 (Kumar et al., 2016 based on the best-fitting model identified by the model test in MEGA (3CL pro and ADRP: LG model (Le and Gascuel, 2008) ; 1a: JTT model (Jones et al., 1992) ). A discrete Gamma distribution was used to model evolutionary rate differences among sites and the rate variation model allowed for some sites to be evolutionarily invariable (for ADRP and 1a). Branch lengths are proportional to genetic distances as indicated by the scale bar, and the outcome of the bootstrap analysis (Felsenstein, 1985) is shown next to the nodes. Figure S4 . Phylogenetic analyses of avian caliciviruses. The trees are based on amino acid sequences of the whole portion of the ORF1 coding for nonstructural proteins (NS) and the capsid protein VP2 of all avian caliciviruses and two mammalian viruses as an outgroup (PeDu: pink-eared duck; Du: duck; Go: goose; Av: avocet; Cr: crane; Tu: turkey; Ch: chicken; Gt: grey teal; Rt: ruddy turnstone; Sd: shelduck; Hu: human; Po: porcine). Recently identified viruses that lack official taxonomic designation are indicated by circles with the viruses identified in this study indicated by filled green circles. In each tree the amino acid identities of DuCV-2 compared to its three closest relatives included in the dotted box are indicated. The trees were built with the maximum likelihood method (Felsenstein, 1981) using MEGA 7 (Kumar et al., 2016) based on the best-fitting model identified by the model test in MEGA (LG model (Le and Gascuel, 2008) ). A discrete Gamma distribution was used to model evolutionary rate differences among sites and the rate variation model allowed for some sites to be evolutionarily invariable (for NS only). Branch lengths are proportional to genetic distances as indicated by the scale bar, and the outcome of the bootstrap analysis (Felsenstein, 1985) is shown next to the nodes.