Page Table of Study Design: This is an open-label Phase I study to evaluate the safety, tolerability, and immunogenicity of 3-injection vaccination regimen with an investigational plasmid DNA vaccine that encodes for H1 hemagglutinin (HA) of an H1N1 influenza virus. All study participants will be offered to receive an additional optional booster immunization with licensed inactivated monovalent H1N1 influenza vaccine. The hypothesis is that the DNA vaccine will be safe for human administration and will elicit an antibody response. The primary objectives are to evaluate the safety and tolerability of the VRC-FLUDNA057-00-VP DNA vaccine at a dosage of 4 mg administered in a 3-injection schedule. The secondary objectives are to evaluate antibody responses including induced antibody titer as measured by a hemagglutination inhibition (HAI) assay and to document the reactogenicity of the inactivated H1N1 influenza vaccine when administered to subjects previously vaccinated with the VRC-FLUDNA057-00-VP DNA vaccine.
Exploratory objectives are related to further evaluation of the humoral and cellular immune responses, including the responses after each injection and after the boost with licensed H1N1 inactivated influenza vaccine.
The VRC-FLUDNA057-00-VP vaccine was developed and manufactured by VRC, NIAID and is composed of 1 closed-circular DNA plasmid with a CMV/R promoter that encodes for the H1 hemagglutinin from the Influenza A/California/04/2009 H1N1 virus, identified late in the 2008-2009 northern hemisphere (NH) influenza season that has been referred to as "swine flu" in news reports. Vaccine vials will be supplied at 4 mg/mL and each 4 mg dosage will require a 1 mL injection. Vaccinations with the H1 DNA vaccine will be administered intramuscularly (IM) in the deltoid muscle using the Biojector 2000 Needle-Free Injection Management System (Biojector). Licensed inactivated monovalent H1N1 influenza vaccine will be obtained through the NIH Clinical Center (CC) pharmacy, for use as a booster injection, and administered with needle and syringe. The brand administered will depend upon what is available through the NIH CC.
A total of 20 healthy adults in the 18-70 years age range will be enrolled; however, no more than 10 subjects will be in the 51-70 year old age range.
All subjects will receive 3 injections of the H1 DNA vaccine as shown in the schedule below. No more than 5 subjects may be enrolled in the first week of the study. Following the 5th enrollment, the remainder of subjects may be enrolled without restrictions on enrollment rate. All subjects that have no contraindications to the licensed inactivated H1N1 vaccine or to additional blood drawing will be offered the option to receive the licensed inactivated H1N1 influenza vaccine. The study includes 7 clinic visits and 3 telephone contacts as well as 3 additional visits for subjects that opt to receive an inactivated influenza vaccine. Subjects who have received the inactivated H1N1 vaccine outside of the VRC Clinic after Study Week 12 may consent to contribute the additional research samples through completing the extra visits on the schedule for post boost evaluations. A target window for the inactivated H1N1 vaccine is shown in the schema below. However, given that all subjects will be at or beyond Study Week 12, the earliest mutually convenient date after the H1N1 vaccine supply and amended protocol become available is acceptable for administration of the optional injection. The added post-boost research sample collections will then be scheduled to occur relative to the date of the H1N1 booster injection.
Vaccine Injection Schedule 
Influenza is a negative-strand ribonucleic acid (RNA) virus that belongs to the family Orthomyxoviridae. Of the three genera of influenza circulating in nature (influenza A, B, and C), only the first two are known to cause epidemics [1] . Influenza A viruses are encoded by 8 RNA gene segments, and classified on the basis of the antigenicity of their surface glycoproteins: hemagglutinin (HA) and neuraminidase (NA). Sixteen HA subtypes and 9 NA subtypes are known to exist, but only three HA subtypes (H1, H2, and H3) and two NA subtypes (N1 and N2) have caused significant human epidemics [2] .
The public health burden of influenza in the world is enormous. Annual influenza epidemics cause about 250,000 to 500,000 deaths worldwide [3] . Circulating viruses change quickly and re-assort with each other creating new viruses that present an immediate threat to public health and require development of new vaccines. The significant public health impact of influenza infections is compounded by the potential of a pandemic caused by emerging virus strains for which there is little or no pre-existing immunity in the population. Several worldwide outbreaks of influenza happened in the last century [4] .
A novel swine-origin influenza A (H1N1) virus (S-OIV) has been identified as a cause of multiple recent cases of infection worldwide [5] . The exact origin of this virus is still unclear, however, triple -reassortant swine influenza viruses that contain human, swine and avian influenza A virus components were identified in pigs in the United States in the late 1990s [6] .
As of June 19, 2009, a total of 21,449 confirmed and probable human cases of novel Influenza A (H1N1) and 87 deaths associated with it have been identified in the United States (http://www.cdc.gov/h1n1flu/update.htm). On June 11, 2009 , the World Health Organization (WHO) raised the worldwide pandemic alert level to Phase 6 that indicates that a global pandemic is in development [7] . The virus has spread to more than 70 countries yet, it is uncertain at this time how serious or severe this novel H1N1 pandemic will be. Experience with this virus is limited, and influenza viruses are known for acquiring multiple changes in short periods of time upon migrating to a new host. The unusual pathology of this novel influenza strain includes diarrhea and vomiting (in 25% of patients) and a predominance (60% of infected patients) in a population of 18 years old or younger [5] .
Joint efforts of the scientific community resulted in a swift identification and submission of the first set of novel H1N1 Influenza A sequences to the National Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI) [8] . Phylogenetic analysis of the current isolates by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) showed that S-OIV genome contains six gene segments (PB2, PB1, PA, HA, NP, and NS) that are somewhat similar to genomes of described swine triplereassortant viruses [5] . The genes encoding neuraminidase (NA) and matrix (M) proteins were found to be mostly related to influenza A viruses circulating in swine populations in Eurasia. It was also confirmed that this particular combination of influenza virus gene segments had not been seen before [5] .
Annually, the World Health Organization (WHO) makes a recommendation on the composition of the seasonal influenza vaccine, with independent recommendations for the Northern Hemisphere (NH) and for the Southern Hemisphere (SH) considered at different times based on epidemiology data [9] . The currently licensed influenza vaccines consist of 3 components: H1N1, H3N2, and an influenza B virus strain. These vaccines include inactivated influenza vaccines, propagated in embryonated chicken eggs. While efficacious, these vaccines depend upon labor-intensive methods of production and limited manufacturing capacity.
The recent spread of potentially pandemic highly pathogenic H5N1 subtype and a novel swine origin H1N1 subtype that already became pandemic has raised serious concerns about influenza pandemic. In the event of a pandemic influenza strain that is associated with greater than usual morbidity or mortality, the currently available vaccine production methodology would be unable to meet worldwide public health needs. Also, antigen evolution may necessitate a more agile, rapidly scalable production process. In an effort to overcome the limitations of egg-based influenza vaccine production methods, manufacturers including Baxter, Sanofi, Chiron and GSK are developing cell-based influenza vaccines, and an influenza vaccine grown in a canine kidney cell (MDCK) line manufactured by Solvay Pharmaceuticals has been licensed in Europe [10] . An inactivated monovalent whole virus influenza A/Vietnam/1203/2004 (H5N1) vaccine produced in Vero cells (Baxter Bioscience) generated neutralizing antibodies against diverse H5N1 strains in healthy men and women ages 18-45 years. The rates of adverse events, rates of seroconversion and levels of immunogenicity following a two-dose regimen (ranging from 3.75 to 30 g) were comparable to that described for egg-derived products [11] .
Several new technologies have undergone evaluation in hundreds of research subjects in clinical studies, including protein subunit vaccines directed against influenza A viruses including avian influenza H5N1 strains (Protein Sciences Corporation [12] , virosomes or lipid antigen-presenting systems (Solvay Pharmaceuticals) [13] , adenoviral vector vaccines (Vaxin [14] ) and an epidermal deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) vaccine, coated onto gold beads and delivered by the PowderJect device [15] . Other technologies, including live, attenuated vaccines and recombinant particulate vaccines with influenza proteins assembled into virus-like particles, are in preclinical stages of evaluation or have been evaluated in clinical trials [16] [17] [18] . A February 2004 WHO meeting report underscored the need for new broad-spectrum influenza vaccines capable of inducing long-lasting immune responses. The meeting participants recommended that plasmid DNA-based technology should be assessed as an alternative to conventional influenza vaccine production strategies [19] .
Plasmid DNA-based vaccines have demonstrated preclinical efficacy and fast and relatively easy manufacturing processes. Plasmid DNA can be quickly modified to carry an antigen of interest. This process is more efficient than the cumbersome, costly and lengthy traditional processes involved with inactivation, purification, and concentration of native or modified HA antigens [20] .
With the recent emergence of a new pandemic influenza virus, the methodology and timeline for the vaccine development and production has become an urgent issue. It takes more than six months from identification of a pandemic influenza strain to production of the first doses of vaccine using licensed technology [21] . Delays in production could result from poor growth of the virus strain used to make the vaccine. Recombinant DNA technologies allow much faster development and production of the vaccine candidates that are based on viral genome sequences. Testing these potential vaccine candidates in Phase I clinical studies may provide urgently needed data on immunogenicity of a novel influenza strain and clarify if exposure to other influenza subtypes may offer some cross protection. The disadvantage of current DNA vaccines is that it may take several injections to generate an immune response with a magnitude and durability considered adequate for protection [22] . Therefore beyond the proof of concept aspect demonstrating ability to rapidly produce a vaccine, further development of ways to induce a desirable immune response by a single immunization may be needed in the future.
DNA vaccines induce balanced immune responses that address not only humoral immunity, but also trigger T cell responses that may efficiently target cross-reactive viral T cell epitopes, and therefore a potential of these vaccine prototypes in the rapidly changing viral environment warrants further investigation. A DNA vaccine against the HA may elicit cross-reactive T cell responses against conserved regions of this antigen.
The antigenic drift characteristic to influenza A viruses limits the ability of virus-specific antibodies to neutralize the emerging viral variants. However, T-cell responses to the conserved viral epitopes are more cross-reactive and may provide some level of protection against serologically distant strains [23-25]. It has been also suggested that T cell responses are the important correlates of influenza vaccine protection, especially in the elderly populations immunized with the seasonal flu vaccines [26, 27] .
Using stored serum specimens collected in previous vaccine studies, the CDC assessed the level of cross-reactive antibodies to the novel influenza A (H1N1) virus in cohorts of children and adults before and after they had been vaccinated with the 2005-2009 influenza seasonal vaccines [28] . The results indicated that 33% of adults older than 60 years and 6-9% of adults aged 18-64 years had some cross-reactive antibody to the novel influenza, and no cross-reactive antibody was found in children. The results also suggested that although vaccination of adults with the seasonal influenza vaccines generally resulted in a small increase in antibodies against novel influenza, current seasonal vaccine is unlikely to provide protection against the novel influenza A virus.
VRC-FLUDNA057-00-VP product design is based on the concept of immunization by gene transfer. VRC-FLUDNA057-00-VP is a plasmid DNA vaccine intended for use as a preventive vaccine for infection with the novel H1N1 influenza S-OIV strain. The plasmid Drug Substance is the following: VRC 9328 single plasmid, expressing HA protein from Influenza A (A/California/04/2009(H1N1)) (GenBank GQ117044).
Investigators at the Vaccine Research Center (VRC), National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases (NIAID), National Institutes of Health (NIH), Bethesda, MD have developed a plasmid DNA vaccine strategy that has demonstrated protective immune responses against influenza in preclinical studies. This vaccine platform will be tested for safety and immunogenicity in human clinical trials, and will provide the technology platform for development of additional influenza vaccine products, used either as single agents or as part of a prime-boost regimen. DNA plasmid vaccine prime followed by recombinant adenoviral vector boost with vaccines expressing influenza A and B strain nucleoprotein (NP) genes induced protective immunity in mice [29] . Both preclinical and human safety data support the evaluation of plasmid DNA vaccines in clinical trials. The investigational influenza vaccines, VRC-AVIDNA036-00-VP (a 1-plasmid vaccine) that encodes for an H5 HA protein, and VRC-FLUDNA047-00-VP, a 3-plasmid mix that encodes for the seasonal influenza strains, are most similar to VRC-FLUDNA057-00-VP. For this reason, the prior human experience with these vaccines is provided in the Investigator's Brochure as further background on experience with DNA vaccines.
In addition there are preclinical and/or human safety data with other plasmid DNA vaccines that encode for other viral proteins. These vaccines are the human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) vaccines VRC 4302 (a 1-plasmid vaccine), VRC-HIVDNA009-00-VP (a 4-plasmid vaccine), and VRC-HIVDNA016-00-VP (a 6-plasmid vaccine); the Ebola virus vaccines, VRC-EBODNA012-00-VP (a 3-plasmid vaccine) and VRC-EBODNA023-00-VP (a 2-plasmid vaccine); a severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS) virus vaccine, VRC-SRSDNA015-00-VP (a 1-plasmid vaccine); two West Nile virus vaccines, VRC-WNVDNA017-00-VP and VRC-WNVDNA020-00-VP (1-plasmid vaccines); and a Marburg virus vaccine, VRC-MARDNA025-00-VP (a 1-plasmid vaccine) . All have undergone or are currently being evaluated in Phase I clinical trials in healthy adults with age ranges from 18-40 years through 18-70 years old (depending upon the study), with the majority of subjects being in the 18-50 year age range. Overall, VRC DNA vaccines have been safe and well tolerated in a population of healthy adults 18-65 years old [30-33].
All of the VRC DNA vaccines are constructed with either the cytomegalovirus (CMV) (VR-1012) or the CMV/R plasmid backbone. Ten of the vaccines (the 6-plasmid DNA HIV vaccine, both Ebola virus vaccines, the SARS vaccine, the second WNV virus vaccine, the Marburg vaccine, the avian, pandemic and both of the seasonal influenza vaccines) use the CMV/R promoter. The first Ebola virus DNA vaccine was the first VRC DNA vaccine with the CMV/R promoter to enter clinical study in 2003. The HIV DNA vaccine with the CMV/R promoter, VRC-HIVDNA016-00-VP, provides the largest experience to date with a VRC DNA vaccine construct, having been evaluated in extramural Phase I/II studies conducted in the U.S. and internationally.
Cumulatively, more than 1000 study subjects have been vaccinated with VRC DNA vaccines. Dosages up to 8 mg have been administered, with the majority of injections being at a 4 mg dosage. The results of the following clinical trials performed at the VRC Clinic have been published: VRC 004 (VRC-HIVDNA009-00-VP), VRC 204 (VRC-EBODNA012-00-VP), VRC 301 (SRSDNA015-00-VP), and VRC 302 (VRC-WNVDNA017-00-VP)[30-33].
Data from two dose-escalation studies (VRC 004 and VRC 204) indicate that a 4 mg dosage offers the combination of a good safety profile, greater ease of administration than an 8 mg dosage, and reliable immunogenicity as indicated by laboratory measures of immune response. Preclinical and clinical evaluations to date of several plasmid DNA vaccines support the safety and immunogenicity of DNA vaccines administered at the 4 mg dosage [30] [31] [32] [33] .The 4 mg dosage of the DNA influenza vaccine, VRC-FLUDNA057-00-VP, was also selected for this study.
For influenza, avian influenza and West Nile virus, the correlate of protective immunity for an effective vaccine is expected to be the induction of neutralizing antibody (NAb), and NAb is strongly associated with recovery from natural SARS infection. Although an efficacy study has not yet been performed in humans with any DNA vaccine, the first VRC clinical trial of a WNV vaccine, VRC 302 (VRC-WNVDNA017-00-VP), provided evidence that a DNA vaccine can induce neutralizing antibody. In this study the subjects who received all 3 DNA vaccinations developed neutralizing antibody against WNV as assessed by a reporter virus particle (RVP) neutralizing antibody assay and plaque reduction neutralization test (PRNT) [32] . The VRC 301 SARS vaccine study also showed that a DNA vaccine can induce neutralizing antibody [31] .
The VRC initially designed protocol VRC 308 as a Phase I study to evaluate the safety, tolerability, and immunogenicity of a 3-injection vaccination regimen with only the investigational plasmid DNA vaccine encoding for an H1 HA from the Influenza A (A/California/04/2009 (H1N1)) strain. At the time of study initiation and enrollment, the licensed, inactivated H1N1 2009 pandemic influenza vaccine was in limited supply with access generally restricted to particular risk groups. The VRC 308 study was fully enrolled by November 5, 2009 and in January 2010 all scheduled H1 DNA vaccine injections should have been administered. The NIH Clinical Center Pharmacy expects to be able to obtain licensed inactivated H1N1 vaccine in February 2010 for general use. As study participants may be interested in receiving this vaccine once it is more widely available, we propose to offer it to them as an optional study injection and in this way to also have the opportunity to observe the effect on immune response to further understand the vaccinology of DNA prime and inactivated vaccine boosts with influenza antigens. Study subjects who have received the licensed H1N1 vaccine outside of the VRC Clinic after Study Week 12 may also consent to have additional research samples collected on the expanded follow-up visit schedule.
Blood specimens to evaluate immunogenicity will be taken at baseline and at specified time points. Hemagglutinin 1 (H1)-specific antibody as measured by HAI assay will be conducted on stored samples from the Study Weeks 0 (pre-immunization) and 4 weeks after each injection as a secondary objective of the study. The detection of H1 antibody by HAI assay is based on previously described methods and optimized for detection of antibodies against this strain of H1N1 [28, 34] .
Because the adult study subjects are likely to have pre-existing immune responses to other influenza HA antigens and the effect of vaccination on T cell responses is of interest, a variety of exploratory evaluations of immunogenicity may also be performed. H1-influenza A-specific T cell responses will be measured by intracellular cytokine staining (ICS) assay and enzyme-linked immunospot (ELISPOT) assays. Other H1 antibody assays as well as assays to evaluate crossreactivity of elicited immune responses may be performed at timepoints throughout the study as exploratory evaluations. The ICS assay is based upon previously published methods [35] and quantitates the frequency of CD4 + and CD8 + cells that produce interleukin-2 or interferongamma, in response to pools of overlapping peptides representing specific antigens. Specific peptides will also be used to detect T-cell responsiveness by an ELISPOT assay, modified from a previously published method [36] .
Additional evaluation of B cell responses at 1 week after the first, third and booster study vaccinations will be performed using a B cell ELISPOT assay that determines the proportion of B cells secreting antigen-specific antibodies. The detection of antigen-specific B cells will be based on previously described methods and may differentiate B cells secreting different types of immunoglobulins [37, 38 ].
An interim immunoanalysis will be performed at 4 weeks after each vaccination for the first 10 subjects to guide in planning further studies.
Research samples for immunogenicity assays will be processed by the NIAID Vaccine Immune T-Cell and Antibody Laboratory (NVITAL) in Gaithersburg, MD, where many of the immunogenicity assays will also be performed. Some immunogenicity assays may be performed by VRC laboratories in Bethesda, MD, by approved contract laboratories, including Bioqual Inc. (Rockville, MD), or by approved research collaborators.
The VRC-FLUDNA057-00-VP Drug Substance consists of one closed-circular plasmid DNA macromolecule (VRC 9328) that expresses the H1 Influenza A HA sequence, derived from human isolate H1N1 Influenza A virus (A/California/04/2009 (H1N1)). The plasmid CMV/R promoter consists of translational enhancer region of the CMV immediate early region 1 enhancer (CMV-IE) substituted with the 5 -untranslated human T-cell leukemia virus type 1 (HTLV-1) R-U5 region of the human T-cell leukemia virus type 1 HTLV-1 long terminal repeat VRC-FLUDNA057-00-VP is manufactured at the VRC/NIAID/Vaccine Pilot Plant (VPP) using plasmid DNA received from the VRC to produce clinical trial material under current Good Manufacturing Practices (cGMP). The process for manufacturing, filling, and packaging VRC-FLUDNA057-00-VP is summarized in the Investigator's Brochure (IB). Briefly, the plasmid used in the Master Cell Bank (MCB) was synthesized by VRC using Blue Heron Biotechnology, Inc (Bothell, WA) for human preferred codons as previously described [40] . The plasmid was then transferred to the VPP and the sequence was confirmed before use in the cGMP production process. The plasmid was used to transform the Escherichia coli bacterial host strain, DH5 , in order to produce individual MCB. The MCB was expanded in culture and inoculated into a 100liter fermentor for production. Bacterial cell growth was dependent upon the cellular expression of the kanamycin resistance protein encoded by a portion of the plasmid DNA. Following growth of bacterial cells harboring the plasmid, the plasmid DNA was purified from cellular components, concentrated, filtered through a 0.22 µm membrane, and stored until formulation of the drug product. The final vaccine product will meet lot release specifications prior to administration.
The Drug Product is manufactured at a 4 mg dose in phosphate buffered saline (PBS). Vials will be aseptically filled to a volume of 1.2 mL with 4 mg/mL plasmid.
No preclinical pharmacology, toxicology, pharmacokinetic, or metabolism studies were conducted for the influenza DNA vaccine VRC-FLUDNA057-00-VP. There is extensive clinical experience with DNA vaccines constructed using the same plasmid backbone and CMV/R promoter, including a DNA vaccine with an encoded H5 influenza antigen (see Section 1.3). 
A non-GLP preclinical study was conducted in mice to confirm immunogenicity of the VRC-FLUDNA057-00-VP product expressing H1 HA of the pandemic H1N1 S-OIV. It was concluded that this product is immunogenic and induces neutralizing antibodies in mice.
Briefly, a plasmid DNA VRC-9328 expressing the identical amino acid HA sequence as a novel pandemic swine-origin (H1N1) virus and the vaccine product VRC-FLUDNA057-00-VP was used for immunizations. Control animals were vaccinated with empty CMV/R plasmids. DNA plasmid immunization: Mice were immunized with plasmid VRC 9328 that expresses the H1 Influenza A HA sequence derived from human influenza A virus isolate A/California/04/2009 (H1N1). The plasmid was synthesized by VRC using human preferred codons as previously described [40] . Two groups of mice (10 per group) were immunized IM by needle and syringe on weeks 0, 2, and 4 with 15 µg of a VRC 9328 plasmid or empty CMV/R plasmid in volume of 100 µL. Blood was collected 14 days after each immunization and serum was isolated for determination of neutralization antibody (NAb) titer.
Neutralization antibody (NAb) evaluation: Antisera from immunized mice were assessed for neutralizing activity by incubation with A/California/04/2009 (H1N1) pseudotyped lentiviral reporter vectors encoding luciferase. Percent neutralization was calculated by the reduction of luciferase activity relative to the values achieved in the presence of pre-immune sera as previously described [41] .
Antisera from immunized negative control mice that were immunized with empty CMV/R plasmid alone showed no NAb activity, however vaccination with 2 doses of H1 HA plasmid VRC-9328 elicited H1 neutralizing antibodies that inhibited 50% of viral entry at 1:900 dilution ( Figure 2A ). NAb activity was boosted following administration of the 3 rd dose of DNA vaccine and inhibited 50% of viral entry at least at 1:1600 dilution ( Figure 2B ). 
Licensed inactivated monovalent H1N1 influenza vaccine available through the NIH Clinical Center pharmacy will be used for booster injection. Information about the FDA licensed H1N1 vaccines is available at the following link: http://www.fda.gov/BiologicsBloodVaccines/GuidanceComplianceRegulatoryInformation/Post-MarketActivities/LotReleases/ucm181956.htm
The purpose of this study is to evaluate the safety, tolerability and immunogenicity of the recombinant H1 DNA vaccine VRC-FLUDNA057-00-VP in healthy adults 18-70 years old.
To evaluate the safety and tolerability of the VRC-FLUDNA057-00-VP DNA vaccine administered IM with a Biojector at a dosage of 4 mg in a 3-injection schedule in healthy adults 18-70 years old.
To evaluate antibody responses including induced antibody titer as measured by an HAI assay at 4 weeks after the third injection. To document the reactogenicity of the inactivated H1N1 influenza vaccine when administered to subjects previously vaccinated with the VRC-FLUDNA057-00-VP DNA vaccine.
Exploratory objectives are related to further evaluation of the humoral and cellular immune responses (T cell and B cell), including the responses after each injection and after the boost with licensed inactivated H1N1influenza vaccine.
Antibody evaluation by HAI assay at timepoints following each injection and after the boost with licensed inactivated H1N1 influenza vaccine.
Optional exploratory interim immunoanalysis will be completed with the first 10 subjects at 4 weeks post each vaccination to guide in planning further studies.
This is an open-label Phase I study for adults 18-70 years old to evaluate the safety, tolerability, and immunogenicity of 3-injection vaccination regimen with an investigational plasmid DNA vaccine that encodes for an H1 hemagglutinin from the Influenza A/California/04/2009 H1N1 strain. The study schema is shown in Table 4 .1, including an optional booster injection with a licensed inactivated H1N1 vaccine. A target window for the inactivated H1N1 vaccine is shown in the schema, however, given that all subjects will be at or beyond Study Week 12 the earliest mutually convenient date after the licensed vaccine supply and amended protocol become available is acceptable for administration of the optional injection. The added post-boost research sample collections will then be scheduled for intervals of time that are relative to the date of the H1N1 booster injection. Subjects who have received the H1N1 vaccine outside of the study may consent to contribute additional research samples post-boost as well. The hypothesis is that the DNA vaccine will be safe for human administration and elicit an antibody response.
The study will be conducted by the VRC Clinic, NIAID in the NIH Clinical Center or its approved satellite facilities [e.g., Mobile Clinical Trials Unit (MCTU) or VRC Clinic at Cedar Lane]. Vaccinations will only occur at the NIH Clinical Center.
Safety of the vaccine will be evaluated at scheduled study visits and by study subject report. The estimated duration for each subject to complete immunizations and follow-up is 32 weeks. To maintain a balanced age distribution of subjects, no more than 10 subjects in the 51 to 70 year old age range will be enrolled. Subjects across the full 18-70 year old age range will be enrolled simultaneously. No more than 5 subjects may be enrolled in the first week of the study. Following the 5th enrollment, the remainder of subjects may be enrolled without restrictions on enrollment rate.
Healthy subjects ages 18-70 years will be recruited through Institutional Review Board (IRB)approved advertising and screened through VRC 300 (03-I-0285), a screening protocol for healthy subjects who are interested in participating in vaccine clinical trials. The specific eligibility requirements for this vaccine study will be confirmed prior to enrollment of each subject. The screening, education and consent process that occurs prior to enrollment should ensure that subjects comprehend the purpose and details of the study. An additional short consent form will be used to document subjects' consent for optional injection with inactivated licensed monovalent H1N1 influenza vaccine. The only eligibility requirement for the licensed H1N1 vaccine injection is subject consent, no contraindications to the licensed inactivated influenza vaccine, and no contraindications to additional research blood drawing visits as assessed by the Principal Investigator.
A subject must meet all of the following criteria: 1. 18 to 70 years old.
2. Available for clinical follow-up through Week 32.
3. Able to provide proof of identity to the satisfaction of the study clinician completing the enrollment process.
4. Complete an AoU prior to enrollment and verbalize understanding of all questions answered incorrectly.
5. Able and willing to complete the informed consent process.
6. Willing to donate blood for sample storage to be used for future research. • male partner has previously undergone a vasectomy.
A subject will be excluded if one or more of the following conditions apply:
Women Specific:
1. Breast-feeding or planning to become pregnant during the first 32 weeks after enrollment in the study. 11. Asthma that is severe, unstable or required emergent care, urgent care, hospitalization or intubation during the past two years or that requires the use of oral, intravenous, or high dose inhaled corticosteroids.
12. Diabetes mellitus type I. 13 . Thyroid disease that is not well-controlled.
14. Generalized idiopathic urticaria within the last 1 year.
15. Hypertension that is not well controlled by medication or is more than 145/95 at enrollment.
16. Bleeding disorder diagnosed by a doctor (e.g. factor deficiency, coagulopathy, or platelet disorder requiring special precautions) or significant bruising or bleeding 17. Malignancy that is active or treated malignancy for which there is not reasonable assurance of sustained cure or malignancy that is likely to recur during the period of the study.
18. Seizure disorder other than: 1) febrile seizures, 2) seizures secondary to alcohol withdrawal more than 3 years ago, or 3) seizures that have not required treatment within the last 3 years. 19 . Asplenia, functional asplenia or any condition resulting in the absence or removal of the spleen.
20. Guillain-Barré Syndrome.
21. Psychiatric condition that precludes compliance with the protocol; past or present psychoses; past or present bipolar disorder; disorder requiring lithium; or within 5 years prior to enrollment, a history of suicide plan or attempt.
22. Any medical, psychiatric, social condition, occupational reason or other responsibility that, in the judgment of the investigator, is a contraindication to protocol participation or impairs a volunteer's ability to give informed consent.
Evaluation of the vaccine safety will include laboratory studies, medical history, physical assessment by clinicians, and subject self-assessment recorded on a diary card for 7 days following each study injection. Potential adverse reactions will be further evaluated prior to continuing the immunization schedule. Blood tests for immune responses will be performed at the VRC or its satellite facilities. The study schedule is described in Section 4.2.2 and presented in the form of a Table in Appendix III. Total blood volume drawn from each subject will not exceed the NIH Clinical Center Guidelines.
Screening for this study will be completed through the VRC's infectious disease vaccine screening protocol, VRC 300 (NIH 03-I-0285). Testing will be done according to eligibility criteria and clinical assessment at screening. Screening evaluations for specific eligibility criteria (see Sections 4.1.1 and 4.1.2) must be completed within the time interval specified prior to enrollment, but may be repeated as needed to confirm eligibility. Storage samples of peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) and serum will also be collected during screening; although these will generally be collected in the 56 days prior to enrollment, a particular interval of time prior to enrollment for collection of these samples is not specified.
Day 0 is defined as the day of VRC 308 enrollment and first injection. VRC 308-specific eligibility is reviewed on Day 0 as part of the enrollment process, but eligibility evaluations conducted during a screening visit (VRC 300) are routinely used for eligibility if the screening occurred within the specified window prior to the Day 0 visit. However, if clinical assessment on Day 0 suggests significant changes may have occurred since the screening visit, then the physical examination, hematology tests, and blood chemistries done on Day 0 must be used for eligibility. Pregnancy test results for women of reproductive potential must be obtained on each injection day prior to the study injection. Day 0 evaluations prior to the first injection are the baseline for subsequent safety assessments.
All vaccinations will be administered non-blinded and all subjects will be receiving the same formulation and dose of the investigational product at all 3 vaccinations. The study identification number will be provided following enrollment and prior to ordering the Day 0 vaccination from the site pharmacy.
On each injection day prior to injection, the study subjects will be evaluated clinically. Blood samples for immunological assays will also be collected prior to injection. It is recommended, but not required, that the first injection be administered into the non-dominant arm. It is preferred, but not required, that arms be alternated for the study injections. When choosing an arm for the injection, clinicians should consider whether there is an arm injury, local skin problem or significant tattoo that precludes administering the injection or will interfere with evaluating the arm after injection.
On Day 0 the DNA vaccine (VRC-FLUDNA057-00-VP) at 4 mg dosage will be administered into deltoid muscle in a 1 mL volume using a Biojector 2000 needle-free injection system (Biojector; Bioject Medical Technologies Inc., Portland, OR). The Biojector will be used as directed by the manufacturer. The Biojector uses sterile, single-use syringes for administration of volume up to 1 mL. The study agent is delivered under pressure by a compressed CO 2 gas cartridge that is stored inside the Biojector. Neither the material being injected nor injection site skin preparation requires deviation from the standard procedures. The CO 2 does not come in contact with the injectate and the syringe design prevents any back splatter or contamination of the device by tissue from the participant.
Following each study injection, subjects will remain in clinic for a minimum of 30 minutes. Vital signs (temperature, blood pressure, pulse and respiratory rate) will be taken between 30 and 45 minutes post-injection. The injection site will be inspected for evidence of local reaction. In keeping with the NIH Clinical Center policy and good medical practice, acute medical care will be provided to subjects for any immediate allergic reactions or other injury resulting from participation in this research study.
Vaccine will be administered in accordance to the package insert for the licensed vaccine.
Subjects will be given a "Diary Card", to use as a memory aid, on which to record temperature and symptoms daily for 7 days. Subjects will be trained to use the secure database or complete the paper diary card depending on their preference. When the diary card parameters are recorded directly by the subject through a password-protected secure database, the subject's electronic record will be the source for these data. The written (paper) diary card may be used as a source document. When neither a written nor electronic diary card is available from the subject, the study clinician will note the source of reactogenicity information recorded in the study database.
Follow-up on subject well-being will be performed by telephone on the first or second day following each injection. A clinic visit will be scheduled if indicated by the telephone interview. Events reported during the telephone interview that will require a clinic visit include rash, urticaria, fever of 38.7˚C (Grade 2) or higher lasting greater than 24 hours, or significant impairment in the activities of daily living (ADL). Additionally, other clinical concerns may prompt a study visit based on the judgment of a study clinician. If a skin lesion at the injection site occurs in this study, we may ask the subject to allow us to take a photograph. If the subject agrees, he/she will be asked to sign the NIH Clinical Center Consent for Photography form.
After Day 0, deviations from the visit windows in completing study visits and study injections are discouraged and will be recorded as protocol deviations, but are permitted, at the discretion of the PI (or designee) in the interest of completing the vaccination schedule and obtaining subject safety and immunogenicity evaluations following exposure to the investigational vaccine. The schedule shown in Appendix III is the target schedule and effort will be made to stay as close as possible to this schedule. However, the timing of administration of the optional licensed inactivated H1N1 injection is at the discretion of the Principal Investigator given the uncertainly of supply availability and the importance to study subject and public health to administer at the earliest mutually agreeable time; all subjects will be at or after Study Week 12 when licensed inactivated H1N1 vaccine becomes available for administration in this protocol.
"VRC 308 Assessment of Understanding" Quiz Signature of study participation informed consent form for VRC 308
Clinical evaluations: vital signs and targeted physical exam on any visit if indicated by interim complaints or laboratory findings.
Interim medical history including immunization status and approximate time of immunization with the current seasonal influenza vaccine.
Counseling on avoidance of pregnancy (for women of reproductive potential).
Post-injection vital signs and assessment of injection site at 30 to 45 minutes post-injection.
Diary Card: Baseline on day of injection; 7-day diary card for self-assessment by subject following each study injection. The diary card will include the parameters: unusually tired/feeling unwell, muscles aches (other than at injection site), headache, chills, nausea, and pain/tenderness at injection site. Subjects will also record highest measured temperature and measurement of perpendicular diameters for redness and swelling at injection site. The completed diary cards will be collected at the first visit following completion or collected in real-time by secure web-based subject data entry system depending on a preference of the subject.
Serum or urine pregnancy test, for females of reproductive potential. If a subject becomes pregnant, the subject will be contacted for follow-up information regarding the outcome of the pregnancy. Human Leukocyte Antigen (HLA): [available results from prior testing performed at the NIH Clinical Center may be recorded] high resolution MHC class I and class II will be ordered.
Blood creatinine and ALT Influenza-specific antibody as measured by HAI assay. Note: The assays will not be performed immediately, but rather completed using frozen samples at a later date. If indicated, this assay may be performed on stored sera from other timepoints.
ICS and ELISPOT assays will be done as exploratory analyses on stored samples. Plasma and PBMCs will be collected and stored for these assays and may be used for other exploratory laboratory assays.
Serum for archiving for a variety of exploratory immunogenicity evaluations. Any cells, serum or plasma not used will be stored for future virological and immunological assays. Stored samples may be used later to elucidate genetic factors associated with immune response to a vaccine and to further evaluate responses to the vaccine.
Concomitant medications are reviewed for eligibility and recorded at screening and every study visit. If an FDA-approved live attenuated vaccine is required, it is recommended that it be given at least 4 weeks before the first or 4 weeks after the third study injection. After enrollment, if an FDA-approved subunit or killed vaccine is required for an immediate medical need, then it is recommended that it be given at least 14 days before the first or 14 days after the third study injection. If it will not imperil a subject's health, FDA-approved vaccines should be deferred until the visit that is scheduled for 8 weeks after the final study injection is completed. This recommendation is to avoid any potential effect on the immunogenicity analysis.
The schedule of this protocol involves three injections of investigational influenza vaccine. Any subject who discontinues injections will be followed for safety and immunogenicity according to the schedule in Appendix III; if the reason for discontinuation is pregnancy a follow-up contact will be scheduled to record the outcome of the pregnancy. Specific events that will require withdrawal of a subject from the injection schedule include the following:
1. Pregnancy 2. Immediate hypersensitivity reaction associated with a study injection;
3. Intercurrent illness that is not expected to resolve prior to the next scheduled study injection, and assessed by the study clinician to require withdrawal from the injection schedule;
4. Treatment with immunomodulators (other than nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs [NSAIDs]) for any reason; except that a short course of systemic glucocorticoids completed at least 14 days prior to next injection is not a criteria for withdrawal. 8. The IRB or the FDA request that the study be stopped.
The Principal Investigator will closely monitor and analyze study data as they become available and will make determinations regarding the presence and severity of adverse events.
The administration of study injections and new enrollments will be paused to evaluate unexpected potential safety concerns related to the investigational DNA vaccine and the IND Sponsor will be promptly notified according to the following criteria:
One (or more) subject experiences a Grade 4 or Grade 5 adverse event that is assessed as possibly, probably, or definitely related to the study vaccine, or
Two (or more) subjects experience the same Grade 3 adverse events assessed as possibly, probably, or definitely related to the study vaccine.
The study injections and enrollments would resume only if review of the adverse events that caused the pause resulted in a recommendation to permit further study injections and study enrollments. The reviews to make this decision will occur as follows:
The IND Sponsor, with participation by the Principal Investigator, will consult with the FDA to conduct the review and make the decision to resume or close the study for any Grade 4 and Grade 5 adverse events that meet the criteria for pausing the study.
The IND Sponsor, in consultation with the Principal Investigator, will conduct the review and make the decision to resume or close the study for the Grade 3 events that meet the criteria for pausing the study. As part of the pause review, the reviewers will also advise on whether the study needs to be paused again for any subsequent Grade 3 event of the same type.
Safety data reports and changes in study status will be submitted to the IRB promptly in accordance with Section 5.4 and institutional policy.
An adverse event (AE) is any unfavorable or unintended change in body structure, body function or laboratory result associated temporally with the use of study treatment, whether or not considered related to the study treatment. Each adverse event will be graded according to the table for grading severity of adverse events (see Appendix IV). Reporting of all AEs will occur during 2 periods for each participant: 1) from enrollment through 28 days after the final H1 DNA Between and after the indicated time periods, only SAEs (as detailed in Section 5.3), new chronic medical conditions and influenza or influenza-like illness will be recorded through the last study visit. If a subject does not receive the second, the third or optional licensed inactivated H1N1 study injection, all AEs will be reported through 28 days after the last injection received and then only SAEs (as detailed in Section 5.3), new chronic medical conditions, and influenza or influenza-like illness will be recorded through the last study visit.
The term "Serious Adverse Drug Experience" is defined in 21 CFR 312.32 as follows:
"Any adverse drug experience occurring at any dose that results in any of the following outcomes: Death, a life-threatening adverse drug experience, inpatient hospitalization or prolongation of existing hospitalization, a persistent or significant disability/incapacity, or a congenital anomaly/birth defect. Important medical events that may not result in death, be lifethreatening, or require hospitalization may be considered a serious adverse drug experience when, based upon appropriate medical judgment, they may jeopardize the subject or require medical or surgical intervention to prevent one of the outcomes listed in this definition. Examples of such medical events include allergic bronchospasm requiring intensive treatment in an emergency room or at home, blood dyscrasias or convulsions that do not result in inpatient hospitalization, or the development of drug dependency or drug abuse." "Life-threatening" refers to an adverse event that at occurrence represents an immediate risk of death to the subject. An event that may cause death if it occurs in a more severe form is not considered life-threatening. Similarly, a hospital admission for an elective procedure is not considered a Serious Adverse Event (SAE).
Information on adverse events is collected by research nurses and other clinic staff and entered into a computer database. AE data are reviewed on an ongoing basis by the Study Coordinator and the Principal Investigator.
Adverse experiences that meet SAE Reporting Requirements must be reported by the Principal Investigator or designee to the RCHSPP Clinical Safety Office, the representative of the IND Sponsor.
An adverse event is determined to be serious based on the outcome of the adverse event. Briefly summarized, events requiring completion of an SAE report form include the following outcomes, regardless of assessed relationship to study agent: Inpatient hospitalization or prolongation of an existing hospitalization (other than for elective reasons) Important medical event that may not be immediately life-threatening or result in death or hospitalization but may jeopardize the patient/study subject or may require intervention to prevent one of the other outcomes listed above For the purposes of this protocol, spontaneous abortion will be reported as an SAE All deaths and life-threatening SAEs due to any cause that occur during the course of the study must be reported to the RCHSPB Clinical Safety Office within 1 business day after the Principal Investigator or designee becomes aware of the event. All other SAE reports must be submitted to RCHSPB as soon as possible, but no later than 3 working days after the Principal Investigator or designee becomes aware of events meeting these criteria. Each SAE will be followed until resolution or until the Principal Investigator deems the event to be chronic or the subject to be stable.
The RCHSPB Clinical Safety Office can be contacted by phone at 301-846-5301, by fax at 301-846-6224, and by email at RCHSPSafety@mail.nih.gov. The IND Sponsor is responsible for submitting IND safety reports to the FDA, as necessary, per 21 CFR 312.32. The IND Sponsor will notify the FDA within 7 calendar days of receipt of information about a death or lifethreatening event that meets expedited reporting requirements. For all other reports the RCHSPB will submit IND safety reports as soon as possible, but no later than 15 calendar days after initial receipt of the information.
Adverse event reporting requirements to the NIAID Institutional Review Board (IRB) (6700-B Rockledge Drive, Bethesda, MD 20892-7609) for this protocol are as follows:
Investigators will submit a completed serious adverse event report to the NIAID IRB within 7 days after becoming aware of a subject death, a potentially life-threatening (Grade 4) serious adverse event that is possibly, probably, or definitely related to the investigational agent, an inpatient hospitalization (other than elective), a persistent or significant disability/incapacity, or a congenital anomaly/birth defect.
Investigators will report within 15 days on any other event or condition regardless of grade, which in their judgment represents an event reportable to the IRB.
Investigators will forward all IND safety reports and related FDA communications to the IRB within 15 days of receipt.
A summary of all adverse events will be reported to the NIAID IRB with submission of a request for continuing review.
The NIH Institutional Biosafety Committee (IBC) (Building 13, Room 3K04, NIH, Bethesda, MD) has the responsibility to review research using recombinant DNA for compliance with NIH Guidelines. In keeping with IBC requirements, any SAE reports sent to the IRB will be provided to the IBC.
This study is a single-center trial to assess the safety and tolerability of investigational H1 influenza DNA vaccine, VRC-FLUDNA057-00-VP, administered at a dose of 4 mg in a 3injection schedule and followed by an optional immunization with licensed inactivated monovalent H1N1 influenza vaccine. An exploratory assessment of immunogenicity will also be performed.
The primary objective of this trial concerns the DNA vaccine safety. The secondary and exploratory objectives concern immunogenicity of the vaccination.
Assessment of product safety will include clinical observation and monitoring of hematological and chemical parameters. Safety will be closely monitored after injection and evaluated by clinical visits through Study Week 32. See Section 4.2 and Appendix III for details and specified time points. The following parameters will be assessed:
Local reactogenicity signs and symptoms Systemic reactogenicity signs and symptoms Laboratory measures of safety Adverse experiences through 28 days after the last study injection Serious Adverse Events and new chronic medical conditions throughout the study 6.3.2 Immunogenicity The principal immunogenicity endpoints are HA-specific antibody responses (as measured by HAI assay). Exploratory endpoints are HA-specific T-cell responses (as measured by ICS assay and ELISPOT assay). For the HAI assay endpoint, a positive response for a subject is defined as the subject achieving a 4-fold rise in HA HAI antibody titer from baseline (Day 0) to 4 weeks post any of the vaccinations; for subjects with no immunity at baseline (<1:10 titer), this will be an increase to a titer of 1:40 (defined as seroprotection) and for subjects with a positive titer at baseline, a positive titer will need to be 4 fold higher than the Day 0 value (defined as seroconversion) [42, 43] . For the exploratory endpoints on HA-specific T-cell responses, responses will be considered positive if an increase of at least 50 SFC above background will be detected by ELISpot assay, or 0.05% increase over baseline in the ICS assay for CD4 or CD8 cells is detected. The subjects will be recorded as having a positive response whenever the assays at 4 weeks after any of the injections are positive and having a negative response for whenever these assays are negative. The exploratory objectives related to further evaluation of the humoral and cellular immune responses will include evaluation of these responses from baseline to the last study visit.
The study design is to enroll 20 healthy adult participants age 18-70. All subjects will be treated open-label with 3 vaccinations with investigational product VRC-FLUDNA057-00-VP on Day 0, week 4 and week 8. Eligible study participants will be offered a single optional booster immunization with licensed inactivated monovalent H1N1 influenza vaccine at or after their Study Week 12 visit. The enrollment plan does not include provision for replacing participants with incomplete vaccination or visit schedules.
The goal of the safety evaluation for this study is to identify safety concerns associated with injections of the investigational vaccine. Primary sample size calculations for safety are expressed in terms of the ability to detect serious adverse experiences.
The ability of the study to identify SAEs will be expressed in terms of the probability of observing a certain number of serious adverse events. Useful values are the minimum true event rate such that the probability of observing at least one event is at least 90% and the maximum true event rate such that the probability of not observing any event is at least 90%. Within n=20 vaccinees, there is over 90% chance to observe at least 1 SAE if the true rate is at least 0.109 and over 90% chance to observe no SAE if the true rate is no more than 0.005. Probabilities of observing 0 or more than 1 serious adverse event within group are presented in Table 6 .1 for a range of possible true event rates. These calculations provide a more complete picture of the sensitivity of this study design to identify potential safety problems with the vaccine. Table 6 .2 is applicable to the immunogenic response rates, and gives the exact 95% confidence interval of the true response rate over possible number of responses out of the 20 vaccinees. For example, if we observe 4 responses among the 20 vaccinees, the 95% exact binomial confidence interval of the true response rate will range from 0.057 to 0.437. Table 6 .1 gives the probabilities of observing 0 or at least 2 responses over a range of underlying response rates. For example, if the true response rate at a particular time point is 0.20, then there is a probability of 0.988 to observe at least one response and a probability of 0.931 to observe at least two responses among the 20 vaccinees.
The study includes only one group of treated subjects and therefore no statistical comparisons of response rate is required.
Since enrollment is concurrent with receiving the first study vaccination, all participants will receive at least one vaccination and therefore will provide some safety data. All statistical analyses will be performed using Statistical Analysis System (SAS), R, or S-Plus statistical software.
The analysis variables consist of baseline variables, safety variables, and immunogenicity variables for primary and secondary objective analyses.
Baseline characteristics including demographics and laboratory measurements will be summarized using descriptive statistics.
The number and percentage of participants experiencing each type of reactogenicity sign or symptom will be tabulated by severity. For a given sign or symptom, each participant's reactogenicity will be counted once under the maximum severity for all assessments.
Adverse experiences are coded into Medical Dictionary for Regulatory Activities (MedDRA) preferred terms. The number and percentages of participants experiencing each specific adverse event will be tabulated by severity and relationship to treatment. For the calculations in these tables, each participant's adverse experience will be counted once under the maximum severity or strongest recorded causal relationship to treatment.
A complete listing of adverse experiences for each participant will provide details including severity, relationship to treatment, onset, duration and outcome.
Boxplots of local laboratory values will be generated for baseline values and for values measured during the course of the study. Each boxplot will show the 1st quartile, the median, and the 3 rd quartile. Outliers, or values outside the boxplot, will also be plotted. If appropriate, horizontal lines representing boundaries for abnormal values will be plotted.
The statistical analysis for immunogenicity will employ the intent-to-treat principle, i.e., all data from enrolled participants will be used. In the final analysis of immunogenicity, if there are cases of a subject receiving a regimen different from the assignment, then an as-treated analysis will be performed.
If assay data are qualitative (i.e., positive or negative) then analyses will be performed by tabulating the frequency of positive response for each assay at each time point that an assessment is performed. Binomial response rates will be presented with their corresponding exact 95% confidence interval estimates. Missing responses will be assumed to be missing at random, i.e., conditional on the observed data the missingness is independent of the unobserved responses. Graphical descriptions of the longitudinal immune responses will also be given.
Some immunologic assays have underlying continuous or count-type readout that is often dichotomized into responder/nonresponder categories. For these assays, graphical and tabular summaries of the underlying distributions will be made. These summaries may be performed on transformed data (e.g., log transformation) to better satisfy assumptions of symmetry and homoscedasticity.
Interim analysis of immunogenicity may be performed at 4 weeks post each study injection for the first 10 subjects. The reports will be provided to the Principal Investigator and other key VRC investigators solely for the purpose of planning future studies in a timely manner. Early interim results are not conducted to influence the conduct of the VRC 308 trial in terms of early termination or later safety or immunogenicity endpoint assessments.
Study numbers 01308001 through 01308020 will be used for the sequential enrollment of subjects.
The study number will be assigned after completion of the enrollment form in the electronic study database. The study number will be assigned on Day 0 after the study consent is signed and eligibility is confirmed.
The vaccination schedule is shown in Table 4 .1. Refer to Section 2 for information about manufacturing of study agents.
An investigational study agent may only be shipped to the site pharmacy if the IND with VRC 308 is assessed by the FDA as "safe to proceed." This study includes treatment with one investigational vaccine VRC-FLUDNA057-00-VP at 4 mg/mL (DNA vaccine). The VRC-FLUDNA057-00-VP vaccine at 4 mg/mL will be administered in 3 IM injections in volume of 1 mL via Biojector in deltoid muscle on Days 0, 28 (±7 days) and 56 (±7 days) with at least 21 days between injections.
A licensed inactivated monovalent H1N1 influenza vaccine available through the NIH Clinical Center pharmacy will be used for booster injection.
At the time of delivery of the study agent to the pharmacy the labels for study agent VRC-FLUDNA057-00-VP (DNA vaccine) will have specific product information (e.g., part number, lot number, fill volume, storage temperature) included on the product vial labels. The labels will contain an Investigational Use Statement ("Caution: New Drug -Limited by Federal Law to Investigational Use"), and manufacturer information.
An inactivated monovalent H1N1 influenza vaccine is labeled by the manufacturer. 
If deviations in storage temperature occur from the normal allowance for the pharmacy freezer, the site pharmacist must report the storage temperature excursion promptly to the PI and IND sponsor in compliance with the NIH Clinical Center policy. The excursion must be evaluated and investigated and action must be taken to restore and maintain the desired temperature limits. Temperature excursions that are outside of the normal allowance for the storage device in which product is kept will be reported per pharmacy guidelines. Pending the outcome of the investigation, the IND sponsor will notify the pharmacist if continued clinical use of the product is acceptable.
VRC-FLUDNA057-00-VP: Upon release by VRC, the DNA vaccine vials will be shipped within the recommended temperature range using appropriate shipping configurations, to the study pharmacist, and will be stored in the -20ºC freezer (within the range -25ºC to -10ºC); storage below -45ºC is not permitted because of the stopper limitation.
Inactivated monovalent H1N1 influenza vaccine: The licensed vaccine used for this study will be stored in accordance with the manufacturer specifications.
This section describes how the site pharmacist will prepare the DNA vaccine injections. Clinician instructions on how to select an arm and administer the injection are in Section 4.2.2.
The DNA vaccine is supplied as a 2 mL glass vial containing a clear colorless isotonic sterile solution. Each vial contains 20% over the amount to be injected in cGMP grade phosphatebuffered saline. Vials are intended for single use only, and thus do not contain a preservative. They should not be refrozen after thawing. Each vial (4 mg/mL) contains a volume of 1.2 mL (4.8 mg).
Remove a vial of the DNA vaccine 4 mg/mL from the freezer. Allow the vial to equilibrate to room temperature (15 to 30º C). Swirl the contents gently. Using aseptic technique, withdraw 1 mL of the DNA vaccine from the vial into the Biojector syringe and cap the syringe. Label the syringe with the subject identifier and the date and time allowance for administration.
One 1 mL injection of the 4 mg/mL preparation will be administered for each 4 mg dose of DNA vaccine. A dose of vaccine will be prepared in the Clinical Center pharmacy and the prepared Biojector syringe labeled with the subject identifier will be delivered to the VRC clinic for administration. The pharmacy will also label with information about date and time after which the preparation may not be used.
The injection must be administered within 4 hours after removing the vial from the freezer.
Inactivated monovalent H1N1 influenza vaccine: The inactivated monovalent H1N1 influenza vaccine will be prepared and administered in accordance with the manufacturer specifications.
The study pharmacist will be responsible for maintaining an accurate record of the inventory and an accountability record of the investigational and inactivated licensed H1N1 vaccine supply for this study. Electronic documentation as well as paper copies will be used. If single use syringes of the inactivated vaccine cannot be obtained and multiuse vials are used, then a portion of the study agent accountability may be conducted by clinic staff once the multiuse vial is transferred to the clinic.
The empty vials of investigational product and the unused portion of a vial will be discarded in a biohazard containment bag that will be incinerated or autoclaved. Any unopened vials that remain at the end of the study will be discarded at the discretion of the VRC in accordance with policies that apply to investigational agents. Partially used vials or expired prepared doses cannot be administered to other subjects nor used for in vitro experimental studies and will be discarded as indicated above.
The inactivated monovalent H1N1 influenza vaccine will be disposed in accordance with the manufacturer specifications and NIH Clinical Center Pharmacy practices.
This research study will be conducted in compliance with the protocol, Good Clinical Practices (GCP) guidelines, and all applicable regulatory requirements.
The study informed consent and consent for an optional injection with the licensed monovalent inactivated H1N1 influenza vaccine are provided in Appendix I. The study consent describes the investigational product to be used and all aspects involved in protocol participation.
Before a subject may participate in the study, it is the investigator's responsibility to obtain written informed consent from the subject, after adequate explanation of the aims, methods, anticipated benefits, and potential hazards of the study and before any protocol-specific procedures or study medications are administered.
The acquisition of informed consent will be documented in the subject's medical records, as required by 21 CFR 312.62, and the informed consent form will be signed and personally dated by the subject and by the person who conducted the informed consent discussion. The original signed informed consent form will be retained in the medical chart and a copy of the informed consent form will be provided to the subject.
This is the first study in humans of the DNA vaccine, VRC-FLUDNA057-00-VP. The risks noted are based on risks from the earlier DNA vaccine studies of similar vaccines, as well as risks of vaccines in general and results of previous studies with other investigational DNA vaccines.
Potential side effects resulting from intramuscular injection include stinging, arm discomfort, redness of the skin, mild bruising or a small laceration at vaccine injection sites. Study subjects can receive medications such as acetaminophen, NSAIDs, or antihistamines as required. Subjects may exhibit general signs and symptoms associated with administration of a vaccine injection, including fever, chills, rash, aches and pains, nausea, headache, dizziness and fatigue. These side effects will be monitored, but are generally short term and do not require treatment.
Potential risks of DNA vaccines include: muscle damage, antibodies to DNA, insertion of the vaccine DNA into host genomic DNA (a potential cancer risk), or insertion of the vaccine DNA into a bacterium or virus.
In previous VRC DNA vaccine studies, placebo and vaccine recipients were noted to have occasional asymptomatic and self-limited changes in laboratory tests. Urticaria has been reported as an infrequent adverse event possibly related to DNA vaccines.
Other investigational DNA vaccines administered via Biojector have been associated with mild skin lesions (0.5-1.0 cm diameter) at the vaccination site. In these cases a small scab formed within 1-2 weeks after immunization and came off after a few days. The skin healed without treatment within a few weeks. One skin biopsy was obtained on Day 6 post vaccination. It showed subcutaneous and dermal perivascular lymphocytic inflammation. There were rare eosinophils and rare giant cells noted, and the infiltrate was composed entirely of CD3 positive cells. It included both CD4 + and CD8 + T cells. The process appears to be primarily a subcutaneous inflammatory response to vaccination with cutaneous manifestations.
There may be other unknown side effects.
The risks of the inactivated monovalent H1N1 influenza vaccine are as described in the package insert. Occasionally, adult recipients of the inactivated vaccine may develop influenza-like signs and symptoms such as fever, body aches, headache, malaise, myalgia and/or nausea. These are usually greatest within the first 24 hours after vaccination and last for 1 to 2 days. Some subjects may experience reactogenicity at the site of vaccination (redness, swelling, pain, or tenderness). Analgesics (e.g., ibuprofen and acetaminophen) and rest will generally relieve or moderate these symptoms. These reactions should go away in 1 to 4 days and not require additional treatment.
Acute and potentially life-threatening allergic reactions are also possible. Since the vaccine may contain limited quantity of egg protein, this protein can induce immediate hypersensitivity reactions among person who have severe egg allergy. Allergic reactions include hives, angioedema, allergic asthma, and systemic anaphylaxis. Egg allergy is a contraindication to receiving the inactivated H1N1 vaccine.
During the swine influenza vaccine campaign of 1976, about 1 per 100,000 vaccine recipients developed a paralytic illness called Guillain-Barré Syndrome. This has not been seen consistently with other influenza vaccines. Most persons who develop Guillain-Barré recover completely.
As with any vaccine, there may be other unknown side effects.
The effect of the study vaccinations on a fetus or nursing baby is unknown, so female subjects of reproductive potential will be required to agree to use birth control for sexual intercourse beginning 21 days prior to enrollment and continuing through the last study visit. Women who are pregnant or nursing will be excluded from the study. Blood drawing may cause pain, bruising, and, rarely, infection at the site where the blood is taken.
Although study subjects may benefit from clinical testing and physical examination, they will not receive direct health benefit from study vaccinations. Others may benefit from knowledge gained in this study that may aid in the development of an improved influenza virus vaccine regimen.
A copy of the protocol, proposed informed consent forms, other written subject information, and any proposed advertising material will be submitted to the IRB for written approval prior to implementation.
The investigator must submit and, where necessary, obtain approval from the IRB for all subsequent protocol amendments and changes to the informed consent documents. The investigator will notify the IRB of deviations from the protocol and serious adverse events in accordance with the IRB policy.
The investigator will be responsible for obtaining IRB approval of the annual Continuing Review throughout the duration of the study.
The investigator must ensure that the subject's anonymity is maintained. Subjects will not be identified in any reports on this study. All records will be kept confidential to the extent provided by federal, state and local law. Medical records are made available for review when required by the FDA or other authorized users, such as the vaccine manufacturer, only under the guidelines set by the Federal Privacy Act. Direct access includes examining, analyzing, verifying, and reproducing any records and reports that are important to the evaluation of the study. The investigator is obligated to inform the subjects that the above named representatives will review their study-related records without violating the confidentiality of the subjects. Stored study research samples are labeled by a code (such as a number) that only the VRC Clinic team can link to the subject. The requirement to maintain subject confidentiality is included in the study informed consent documents.
The June 12, 2006 memorandum "Research Use of Stored Human Samples, Specimens or Data" requires that all NIH IRB-approved protocols in which intramural research program researchers intend to collect and store human specimens or data must include a written description of the intended use of the samples; how they will be stored; how they will be tracked; what will happen to them at the completion of the protocol, and what circumstances would prompt the PI to report to the IRB loss or destruction of samples. We will apply the specified provisions to the stored samples from this protocol as follows:
Intended use of the samples/specimens/data: Samples, specimens and data collected under this protocol may be used to conduct protocol-related safety and immunogenicity evaluations, exploratory laboratory evaluations related to the type of infection the vaccine was designed to prevent, exploratory laboratory evaluations related to vaccine research in general and for research assay validation. Genetic testing may be performed in accordance with the genetic testing information that was included in the study informed consent.
How stored samples, specimens and data from sample use will be stored: All of the stored study research samples are labeled by a code (such as a number) that only the VRC Clinic can link to the subject. Samples are stored at the NIAID Vaccine Immune T-Cell and Antibody Laboratory (NVITAL), Gaithersburg, MD or VRC Laboratories in Building 40, which are both secure facilities with limited access. Data will be kept in password-protected computers. Only investigators or their designees will have access to the samples and data.
How samples/specimens/data will be tracked: Samples will be tracked in the Laboratory Information Management System (LIMS) database.
What will happen to the samples/specimens/data at the completion of the protocol: In the future, other investigators (both at NIH and outside) may wish to study these samples and/or data. IRB approval must be sought prior to any sharing of samples with non-NIH investigators and any clinical information shared about those samples would similarly require prior IRB approval. The research use of stored, unlinked or unidentified samples may be exempt from the need for prospective IRB review and approval. Exemption requests will be submitted in writing to the NIH Office of Human Subjects Research, which is authorized to determine whether a research activity is exempt.
At the time of protocol termination, samples will remain in the NVITAL facility or VRC laboratories and, after IRB approval, transferred to regulatory oversight under an omnibus stored sample protocol. Data will be archived by the VRC in compliance with requirements for retention of research records, or after IRB and study sponsor approval, it may be either destroyed or transferred to another repository.
Circumstances that would prompt the PI to report loss or destruction of samples/specimens/data to the IRB: The NIH Intramural Protocol Violation definition related to loss of or destruction of samples will be followed in reporting to the IRB. Any loss or unanticipated destruction of samples (for example, due to freezer malfunction) or data (for example, misplacing a printout of data with identifiers) will be reported to the IRB. The PI will also notify the IRB if the decision is made to destroy the remaining samples.
All study activities will be carried out at the Clinical Center at the NIH and approved satellite facilities. Study subjects will be recruited through on-site and off-site advertising done for the screening protocol, VRC 300 (03-I-0285). Effort will be made to include women and minorities in proportions similar to that of the community from which they are recruited. Because this Phase I study is designed to establish safety of the vaccine in healthy adults, enrollment will be limited to persons at least 18 years of age, and no older than 70 years of age. Department of Health and Human Services protections for children who participate in research. Generally, healthy children can be studied when the research is considered as "not greater than minimal risk." Children can be involved in research with greater than minimal risk only when it presents the prospect of direct benefit to the individual child or is likely to yield generalizable knowledge about the child's disorder or condition.
Subjects will be compensated for time and inconvenience in accordance with the standards for compensation of the Clinical Research Volunteer Program. The compensation per visit will be $275 for visits that include an injection and $175 for clinic visits that include a blood draw or procedure. Compensation for any clinic visit that does not include a blood draw or procedure will be $75. The approximate total compensation for the subject is based on the number of scheduled study clinic visits and will be approximately $1,525. Any visits completed for the optional inactivated H1N1vaccination and/or follow-up research blood draws will be compensated at the same rate based upon the visit type.
Close cooperation between the designated members of the Protocol Team will occur to evaluate and respond to individual adverse events in a timely manner. A VRC Safety Officer (nurse practitioner or physician) conducts a daily safety review of clinical data per VRC Clinic practice. The Protocol Safety Review Team (PSRT) includes designated team members (Principal Investigator, Associate Investigators, Study Coordinator, Protocol Specialist, IND Sponsor Medical Monitor, and other Study Clinicians). The PSRT will review the summary study safety data reports weekly through 4 weeks after the last subject receives the final study injection in order to be certain that the vaccine has an acceptable safety profile and will continue to monitor the study safety data reports on at least a monthly basis through completion of the last Week 32 visit.
Protocol amendments must be made only with the prior approval of the VRC, NIAID and the RCHSPB, NIAID. Agreement from the investigator must be obtained for all protocol amendments and amendments to the informed consent document. All study amendments will be submitted to the IRB for approval.
The VRC, the Principal Investigator, the NIAID IRB, RCHSPB, NIAID and the FDA reserve the right to terminate the study. The investigator will notify the IRB in writing of the study's completion or early termination.
The investigator will maintain a list of appropriately qualified persons to whom trial duties have been delegated.
Source documents are original documents, data, and records from which the subject's data are obtained. These include but are not limited to hospital records, clinical and office charts, The investigator and staff are responsible for maintaining a comprehensive and centralized filing system of all study-related (essential) documentation, suitable for inspection at any time by representatives from the VRC, RCHSPB, IRB, FDA, and/or applicable regulatory authorities. Elements include:
Subject files containing completed informed consent forms, and supporting copies of source documentation (if kept) Study files containing the protocol with all amendments, Investigator Brochures, and copies of all correspondence with the IRB and VRC In addition, all original source documentation must be maintained and be readily available.
All essential documentation should be retained by the institution for the same period of time required for medical records retention. The FDA requires study records to be retained for two years after marketing approval or refusal (21 CFR 312.62). No study documents should be destroyed without prior written agreement between the RCHSPB, the VRC, and the Principal Investigator. Should the investigator wish to assign the study records to another party or move them to another location, RCHSPB must be notified in writing of the new responsible person and/or the new location.
Clinical research data will be collected in a secure electronic web-based data management system through a contract research organization, EMMES (Rockville, MD). Extracted data without patient identifiers will be sent to the Protocol Statistician for statistical analysis.
The RCHSPB, NIAID and VRC regulatory authority inspectors or their authorized representatives are responsible for contacting and visiting the investigator for the purpose of inspecting the facilities and, upon request, inspecting the various records of the trial, provided that subject confidentiality is respected.
Site investigators will allow the study monitors, the NIAID IRB, and the FDA to inspect study documents (e.g., consent forms, drug distribution forms, and case report forms) and pertinent hospital or clinic records for confirmation of the study data.
Site visits by study monitors will be made in accordance with the IND Sponsor's policy to monitor the following: study operations, the quality of data collected in the research records, the accuracy and timeliness of data entered in the database, and to determine that all process and regulatory requirements are met. Study monitoring visits will occur at initiation of the study, at intervals determined by the IND Sponsor during conduct of the study, and at completion of the study.
All written information and other material to be used by subjects and investigative staff must use vocabulary and language that are readily understood. 
We invite you to take part in a research study at the National Institutes of Health (NIH).
First, we want you to know that:
Taking part in NIH research is entirely voluntary.
You may choose not to take part, or you may withdraw from the study at any time. In either case, you will not lose any benefits to which you are otherwise entitled. However, to receive care at the NIH, you must be taking part in a study or be under evaluation for study participation.
You may receive no benefit from taking part. The research may give us knowledge that may help people in the future.
Second, some people have personal, religious or ethical beliefs that may limit the kinds of medical or research treatments they would want to receive (such as blood transfusions). If you have such beliefs, please discuss them with your NIH doctors or research team before you agree to the study. Now we will describe this research study. Before you decide to take part, please take as much time as you need to ask any questions and discuss this study with anyone at NIH, or with family, friends or your personal physician or other health professional.
This is a study of an experimental vaccine for the prevention of a novel type of influenza ("flu") known as "swine" flu in the news reports. The vaccine that is "experimental" has not been approved by the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) for preventing "flu" infection. The FDA allows its use in research only. The main purpose of this study is to see if the experimental
• A d u l t P a t i e n t o r • P a r e n t , f o r M i n o r P a t i e n t STUDY NUMBER: VRC 308 CONTINUATION: page 2 of 10 pages
• A d u l t P a r t i c i p a n t o r • P a r e n t , f o r M i n o r P a r t i c i p a n t N I H -2 5 1 4 -1 ( 4 -9 7 ) P . A . : 0 9 -2 5 -0 0 9 9 F i l e i n S e c t i o n 4 : P r o t o c o l C o n s e n t vaccine is safe and whether there are any side effects. Another goal is to study blood samples in the laboratory for immune responses.
You are eligible to participate in this study because you have completed the screening process, completed the assessment of understanding, are between 18 and 70 years old, have blood and urine test results that meet eligibility requirements, and you do not have any significant medical problems as determined by your screening.
During the swine influenza vaccine campaign of 1976, about 1 per 100,000 vaccine recipients developed a paralytic illness called Guillain-Barré syndrome. This has not been seen consistently with other influenza vaccines. Most persons who develop Guillain-Barré syndrome recover completely. If you had this condition before, you are not eligible to participate in this study.
The study plan is to enroll 20 people in this study. The study will be done by the Vaccine Research Center (VRC) with study visits occurring at the NIH Clinical Center or approved satellite locations. Study participation will last about 32 weeks for each person. While on the study, you will be monitored for vaccine-related side effects. In this study, the study injections (shots) will be given to people in the upper arms. All injections will be given at the NIH Clinical Center.
You will be told of any new information learned during this study that might cause you to change your mind about staying in the study. At the end of the study, you will be told when study results may be available and how to learn about them.
Vaccines are substances used to try to create resistance (or immunity) to a disease and to prevent an infection. You cannot get a flu infection from vaccine in the study because it does not contain influenza virus. The study vaccine is an experimental vaccine that may not protect you from getting flu infection. It is not one of the "swine flu" vaccines that may be widely available to the general public in the Fall of 2009. DNA Vaccine: Most vaccines are made of proteins and injected into a muscle. Proteins are natural substances that the body uses as building blocks. DNA serves as nature's code (instructions) for protein production in the body. A new kind of experimental vaccine being tested in this study is made from the DNA that is the code for novel influenza protein. It is a sterile preparation in a salt water solution. In this study, the DNA vaccine will be injected into a muscle. It will instruct the body to make a small amount of the influenza protein. The study vaccine was developed by NIH and made at a vaccine manufacturing plant in Frederick, Maryland. This is the first time this DNA vaccine will be given to people.
Twenty healthy adults 18-70 years old will be enrolled in the study. All injections will be given in the upper arm muscle. You will receive three injections during the study. The day of your first
• A d u l t P a t i e n t o r • P a r e n t , f o r M i n o r P a t i e n t STUDY NUMBER: VRC 308 CONTINUATION: page 3 of 10 pages
• A d u l t P a r t i c i p a n t o r • P a r e n t , f o r M i n o r P a r t i c i p a n t N I H -2 5 1 4 -1 ( 4 - 9 7 DNA vaccine injections will be given using a needleless system called the Biojector 2000 . This device delivers the vaccine through the skin without the use of a needle. It uses the pressure of carbon dioxide instead of a needle to inject the vaccine through your skin and into the muscle. Needleless systems have been used since 1947 to deliver vaccines and other types of drugs. This system has FDA clearance for delivering vaccine injections into muscles.
You will have about 7 planned clinic visits during this study (enrollment day and study weeks 1, 4, 8, 9, 12 and 32). Studies of investigational vaccines require following a set schedule for injections and follow-up visits in order to answer the study research questions. Some flexibility in scheduling is permitted, but it is important that you work with the staff to stay on schedule. The visits will usually take about 2 hours, except on the days when you receive injections. On those days, visits will take about 4 hours.
The clinic staff will observe you for at least 30 minutes after each vaccination. One to two days after each injection you must telephone the clinic staff to report on how you are doing. You will be asked to complete a diary card at home. This will require that you record your temperature and symptoms and look at the injection site each day. You will be asked to record any symptoms daily for 7 days and report any side effects to one of the study physicians or nurses as soon as possible. The clinic staff is available to you by phone 24 hours a day.
You may record your symptoms on a paper diary card or enter them into a secure electronic form using the internet. If you choose to report your symptoms through the internet you will be trained by the clinic staff and given a username and password. If you have any symptoms, it may be necessary to come to the study clinic for an examination before your next scheduled visit. It is very important that you follow the instructions given to you by the clinic staff.
At each visit, you will be checked for any health changes or problems since your last visit. You will be asked how you are feeling and if you have taken any medications. This includes pills, injections, over-the-counter medications and herbal supplements, skin medications, inhalers and any other form of medication. If it is not an emergency, call a study nurse or doctor before starting new medicines or getting other vaccines or shots of any type. Blood will be drawn at scheduled study visits and urine samples will be collected to check on your health if needed. You will be told promptly if any of your test results show a health problem. Some blood
• A d u l t P a t i e n t o r • P a r e n t , f o r M i n o r P a t i e n t STUDY NUMBER: VRC 308 CONTINUATION: page 4 of 10 pages
• A d u l t P a r t i c i p a n t o r • P a r e n t , f o r M i n o r P a r t i c i p a n t N I H -2 5 1 4 -1 ( 4 -9 7 ) P . A . : 0 9 -2 5 -0 0 9 9 F i l e i n S e c t i o n 4 : P r o t o c o l C o n s e n t samples will be used to study your immune response to the vaccine. Results of immune response tests are not tests used to check on your health and will not be given to you during the study.
The amount of blood drawn will vary from about 2 tablespoons (30 mL) to about 10 tablespoons (150 mL), depending on the visit. There are 7 planned blood draws. You might also be asked to have laboratory tests between regular visits if needed to evaluate a change in your health. If you have serious side effects, the study physician may decide that you should not receive any further injections. However, you will be asked to continue your study follow-up visits even if you do not get the full set of injections. You will be asked to continue to have blood and urine tests that monitor your health and to complete the blood drawing done for research lab tests.
This study will be monitored by a group of physicians and scientists at the Clinical Center. This group will review the information from the study and will pay close attention to harmful reactions. If it is decided that significant reactions have occurred, further injections may be delayed or canceled.
Some of the blood drawn from you as part of this study will be used for genetic tests. These are done for research purposes only. Genetic tests may help researchers to see if people with different genes differ in their immune response to vaccines. When the genetic tests are done in a research lab, your stored samples will not have your name or other identifying information. Test results from research labs will not be in your medical record. HLA type is a genetic test ordered through the NIH Clinical Center medical laboratory and done in a regular medical laboratory. Only HLA type results will be in your medical record at the NIH Clinical Center. Because your HLA type is a particular genetic test that will be in your medical record, more detail about this test is provided below.
Some of the blood drawn from you as part of this study will be used for a test of HLA type. HLA is like a genetic "fingerprint." It is made up of proteins that play an important role in how the immune system responds to foreign organisms. For research, HLA testing is sometimes used to try to identify factors associated with response to a vaccine, progression of a disease or related conditions. Determining HLA type is necessary to be able to perform certain research studies.
Some HLA types have been associated with an increased risk of certain diseases like arthritis and other rheumatologic problems. Simply having those HLA types, however, doesn't mean you will develop these diseases. Genetic testing can also be used to determine if people are directly related. These tests sometimes show that people were adopted or that their biological parent is someone other than their legal parent. If these facts were not known previously they could be troubling. Additional genetics counseling and advice is available from the National Institutes of
• A d u l t P a t i e n t o r • P a r e n t , f o r M i n o r P a t i e n t STUDY NUMBER: VRC 308 CONTINUATION: page 5 of 10 pages
• A d u l t P a r t i c i p a n t o r • P a r e n t , f o r M i n o r P a r t i c i p a n t N I H -2 5 1 4 -1 ( 4 - 9 7 It is our policy to not discuss such information unless it has direct medical or reproductive implications for you or your family. By agreeing to participate in this study, you do not waive any rights that you may have regarding access to and disclosure of your records. For further information on those rights, you can contact the principal investigator of this study.
Any genetic information collected or discovered about you or your family will be confidential. Results of HLA testing will become a part of your medical record at NIH. Medical records containing this information are maintained in a secure manner. Genetic information about you will not be revealed to others, including your relatives, without your permission. We will not release any information about you or your family to any insurance company or employer unless you sign a document allowing release of information.
At your request, the results of your HLA or genetic research test results will be discussed with you or your physician. We will not notify you of the results of any genetic test results unless it is known from current medical practices that medical care is needed and possible. The genetic research tests we plan to conduct are not currently used in medical practice and the results of such tests are not used to make health care decisions.
During your participation on this study blood samples will be collected from you, as already explained. We will store these samples for future research to learn more about influenza virus, vaccines, the immune system, and/or other medical conditions.
The results from the research done with your stored samples will not be given to your health care provider and will not be put in your medical record. This is because the test results, unlike routine medical testing, will be experimental. This means that whether they have any meaning to your health is unknown. At your request, however, the results of any research tests will be discussed with you or your physician.
You may not participate in this study if you are not willing to have your blood samples stored for future analysis.
Your stored samples will be labeled by a code (such as a number) that only the study team can link to you. Any identifying information about you will be kept confidential to the extent permitted by law.
The greatest risk is the unplanned release of information from your medical records. The chance that this information will be given to an unauthorized person without your permission is very small. Possible problems with the unplanned release of information include discrimination when
• A d u l t P a t i e n t o r • P a r e n t , f o r M i n o r P a t i e n t STUDY NUMBER: VRC 308 CONTINUATION: page 6 of 10 pages
• A d u l t P a r t i c i p a n t o r • P a r e n t , f o r M i n o r P a r t i c i p a n t N I H -2 5 1 4 -1 ( 4 -9 7 ) P . A . : 0 9 -2 5 -0 0 9 9 F i l e i n S e c t i o n 4 : P r o t o c o l C o n s e n t applying for insurance and employment. Similar problems may occur if you disclose information yourself or agree to have your medical records released.
In the future, other investigators at NIH or outside of NIH may wish to study your stored samples. When the study team shares your stored samples, they will be marked with a code, but will not have any identifying information on them. Some information about you, such as your gender, age, health history, or ethnicity may also be shared with other investigators. Any future research studies using your samples will be reviewed by the investigator's Institutional Review Board (IRB), a special committee that oversees medical research studies to protect the rights and welfare of human subjects.
Your stored materials will be used only for research and will not be sold. The research done with your materials may be used to develop new products in the future but you will not receive payment for such products.
Injection Risks: You may experience mild discomfort from the injections. There may be stinging, arm discomfort, pain, soreness, redness, swelling, bruising or a small cut in the skin.
There is a risk of fainting and a very small chance of infection at the injection site. You will be asked to record and report any side effects you experience. You may need to make extra visits to the clinic for evaluation of side effects. You may use over-the-counter (nonprescription) pain medications, if needed.
The possible risks for vaccines in general include fever, chills, rash, aches and pains, nausea, headache, dizziness, and fatigue. We know these side effects do occur with other vaccines. The side effects don't usually last long. As with all vaccines or drugs, you could have an immediate allergic reaction, including a rash, hives, or even difficulty breathing. Allergic reactions can be life threatening; therefore, the clinic staff will watch you for at least 30 minutes after each immunization and provide any needed treatment. There may be other side effects, even serious ones that we don't know about yet. It is important that you report any side effects to the clinic staff as soon as they occur.
In theory, risks related to DNA vaccines in general might include: muscle damage; antibodies to DNA leading to illness; and insertion of the vaccine DNA into the body's DNA (leading to cancer) or into the DNA of a bacteria or virus in your body. None of these possible risks of DNA vaccines have been seen in laboratory tests or in animals or humans so far, but you need to be aware of these possible risks.
Study of DNA vaccines by other groups started as early as 1995. The VRC began its first clinical trial of a DNA vaccine in 2001. Studies of investigational DNA vaccines developed by the VRC have been completed at the NIH Clinical Center and at clinical sites around the world. Experience so far in more than 1000 people with DNA vaccines made by the VRC has been that the vaccinations were safe and well-tolerated.
• A d u l t P a t i e n t o r • P a r e n t , f o r M i n o r P a t i e n t STUDY NUMBER: VRC 308 CONTINUATION: page 7 of 10 pages
• A d u l t P a r t i c i p a n t o r • P a r e n t , f o r M i n o r P a r t i c i p a n t N I H -2 5 1 4 -1 ( 4 - 9 7 Conditions possibly related to vaccination with other experimental DNA vaccines have included temporary low white blood cell count, skin rash and hives. Hives are a kind of allergic reaction. A few subjects in studies of DNA vaccines similar to the one being studied in this protocol have developed hives (itching skin welts), within 2 hours to many days after vaccination and they needed to be treated with medicine. Temporary changes in blood tests have also been seen. It is not known if these changes in laboratory tests were related to vaccines or due to other causes such as patterns of eating or drinking, or illness, or are day-to-day variations in laboratory test results. These changes in lab tests were also seen in people who got placebo injections. These changes did not require treatment. During the study, regular blood tests and check-ups will be performed to monitor your general health and reaction to the vaccine. Some blood will be stored during the study in case additional safety tests are needed.
Sometimes after a DNA vaccine injection by Biojector a small red bump and then a scab has been seen to form at the injection site. The scabs have been less than ½ inch across. These were not deep and were not infected. The skin healed without needing any treatment.
There may be other unknown side effects.
Risks from Blood Drawing: Blood will be drawn from a vein in your arm using a needle. Blood drawing may cause pain and bruising and, rarely, infection at the place where the blood is taken. Sometimes drawing blood causes people to feel lightheaded or even faint.
We do not know the possible effects of the investigational DNA vaccines on the fetus or nursing infant. Because this is a research study, women who may be able to become pregnant are asked to practice adequate birth control beginning at least 21 days prior to receiving the first injection until the last study visit and will have a pregnancy test before each immunization. Adequate methods of birth control include: condoms, male or female, with or without a spermicide; diaphragm or cervical cap with spermicide; intrauterine device; all prescription methods (such as contraceptive pills, patches or other prescription methods); or a male partner who has previously undergone a vasectomy. If you are pregnant, breast-feeding or want to become pregnant in the next six months, you cannot participate. You must notify the clinic staff immediately upon learning that you have become pregnant during this study. You must also notify the clinic if you suspect that you might be pregnant during this study. If you become pregnant, you will be asked to continue with follow-up but the amount of blood drawn will be reduced. You will be contacted to ask about the outcome of the pregnancy.
The safety of the vaccines in this study is unknown. It is unknown if the study vaccine may alter your response to any future infections you may have with influenza viruses. You will be made aware of significant health effects of the vaccine and serious side effects that occur in other subjects and will be updated during the trial as needed.
You may not donate blood at a blood bank while participating in an investigational vaccine study for one year after the date of the last injection of an investigational vaccine.
• A d u l t P a t i e n t o r • P a r e n t , f o r M i n o r P a t i e n t STUDY NUMBER: VRC 308 CONTINUATION: page 8 of 10 pages
• A d u l t P a r t i c i p a n t o r • P a r e n t , f o r M i n o r P a r t i c i p a n t N I H -2 5 1 4 -1 ( 4 -9 7 ) P . A . : 0 9 -2 5 -0 0 9 9 F i l e i n S e c t i o n 4 : P r o t o c o l C o n s e n t
This study is not designed to benefit you. No one knows if the investigational vaccine works to prevent influenza. You and others may benefit in the future from the information that will be learned from the study.
There are no costs to you for participating in this study. All medical costs outside this study will be paid by you or your health insurance carrier (if you have insurance). Participants will receive compensation consistent with NIAID policy to help with transportation costs and other expenses that may occur because of study participation. It is possible that you may have some expenses that are not covered by the compensation provided.
You will be compensated $175 for each visit that does not include an injection but does include a blood draw and $275 for each injection visit. For visits that do not include an injection or a blood draw you will be compensated $75. The approximate total compensation is $1525. This will be based on the number of study visits you attend and study injections you receive. You will be paid throughout the study after each visit. Reimbursement of travel and subsistence will be offered consistent with NIH guidelines.
You may be stopped from receiving study vaccinations for several different reasons, including: You don't keep appointments or follow study procedures. The study sponsor or study doctor decides to stop or cancel the study. The regulatory boards or the FDA decide that the study should be stopped. You get a serious illness. You need to receive certain treatments with medications that negatively affect your immune system. You have a serious side effect thought to be due to vaccination. You become pregnant.
If you agree to take part in this study, it is important for you to keep all your appointments. However, if you don't want to stay in the study, you can leave at any time. You will not lose any benefits that you would have had if you had not joined the study. If the study vaccinations are not completed for any reason you will be asked to continue with follow-up visits until the end of the study. It is important to continue to monitor your health even if you do not receive all three vaccinations.
This study is not designed to treat any disease. You may choose to not participate.
• A d u l t P a t i e n t o r • P a r e n t , f o r M i n o r P a t i e n t STUDY NUMBER: VRC 308 CONTINUATION: page 9 of 10 pages
• A d u l t P a r t i c i p a n t o r • P a r e n t , f o r M i n o r P a r t i c i p a n t N I H -2 5 1 4 -1 ( 4 -9 7 ) P . A . : 0 9 -2 5 -0 0 9 9 F i l e i n S e c t i o n 4 : P r o t o c o l C o n s e n t
The National Institutes of Health reviews NIH staff researchers at least yearly for conflicts of interest. The following link contains details on this process http://ethics.od.nih.gov/forms/Protocol-Review-Guide.pdf .You may ask the research team for additional information or a copy of the Protocol Review Guide.
No conflicts of interest have been identified for any of the principal research staff for this study. This protocol may have investigators who are not NIH employees. Non-NIH investigators are expected to adhere to the principles of the Protocol Review Guide but are not required to report their personal financial holdings to the NIH. One or more investigators participating in this study may have less than $15,000 of stock in the manufacturers of the products used in this study. Under federal regulations, however, this is permissible and does not create a conflict of interest.
The National Institutes of Health, including some members of the Vaccine Research Center scientific staff, developed the investigational DNA vaccine being used in this research study.
The results of this study could play a role in whether the FDA will approve the vaccine for sale at some time in the future. If approved, the future sale of the vaccine could lead to payments to NIH and some NIH scientists. By U.S. law, government scientists are required to receive such payments for their inventions. You will not receive any money from the development or sale of the product.
• A d u l t P a t i e n t o r • P a r e n t , f o r M i n o r P a t i e n t STUDY NUMBER: VRC 308 CONTINUATION: page 10 of 10 pages
• A d u l t P a r t i c i p a n t o r • P a r e n t , f o r M i n o r P a r t i c i p a n t N I H -2 5 1 4 -1 ( 4 - 9 7 When results of an NIH research study are reported in medical journals or at scientific meetings, the people who take part are not named and identified. In most cases, the NIH will not release any information about your research involvement without your written permission. However, if you sign a release of information form, for example, for an insurance company, the NIH will give the insurance company information from your medical record. This information might affect (either favorably or unfavorably) the willingness of the insurance company to sell you insurance. The Federal Privacy Act protects the confidentiality of your NIH medical records. However, you should know that the Act allows release of some information from your medical record without your permission, for example, if it is required by the Food and Drug Administration (FDA), members of Congress, law enforcement officials, or other authorized people such as the vaccine manufacturer and the study sponsor.
The Clinical Center will provide short-term medical care for any injury resulting from your participation in research here. In general, no long-term medical care or financial compensation for research-related injuries will be provided by the National Institutes of Health, the Clinical Center, or the Federal Government. However, you have the right to pursue legal remedy if you believe that your injury justifies such action. You will receive a copy of the vaccine information sheet that is available from the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). The inactivated H1N1 injection will be given in the upper arm muscle with needle and syringe at the standard licensed dose for adults.
In addition to clinic visits to which you consented at enrollment into this study, you will be asked to complete up to 3 additional visits; one for the inactivated H1N1 injection and follow-up visits at 1 week and 4 weeks after this injection. As with other study injections, you will be asked to complete a diary card either on paper or electronically. The amount of blood drawn will vary from about 4 tablespoons (90 mL) to about 8 tablespoons (120 mL), depending on the visit. You might also be asked to have laboratory tests between regular visits if needed to evaluate a change in your health. The H1N1 vaccine injection may occur during an extra visit or on a visit that was already on your study schedule. The follow-up research blood sample collections will be scheduled to be about 1 week and 4 weeks after the vaccination.
Occasionally, adult recipients of the inactivated influenza vaccines may develop flu-like symptoms such as fever, body aches, headache, fatigue, muscle pain and/or nausea. These symptoms are usually greatest within the first 24 hours after vaccination and may last 1 to 2 days. Some people may develop symptoms at the site of
• A d u l t P a t i e n t o r • P a r e n t , f o r M i n o r P a t i e n t STUDY NUMBER: VRC 308 CONTINUATION: page 2 of 3 pages
• A d u l t P a r t i c i p a n t o r • P a r e n t , f o r M i n o r P a r t i c i p a n t N I H -2 5 1 4 -1 ( 4 -9 7 ) P . A . : 0 9 -2 5 -0 0 9 9 F i l e i n S e c t i o n 4 : P r o t o c o l C o n s e n t vaccination (redness, swelling, pain, or tenderness). Over-the-counter pain medications (e.g., ibuprofen or acetaminophen) and rest will generally relieve these symptoms. These symptoms should go away in 1 to 4 days and usually do not require additional treatment.
During the swine influenza vaccine campaign of 1976, about 1 per 100,000 vaccine recipients developed a paralytic illness, which usually starts as numbness of the legs, and that is called Guillain-Barré syndrome. This condition has not been seen consistently with other influenza vaccines. The 1976 swine flu vaccine was different from the one being given currently. Most persons who develop Guillain-Barré syndrome recover completely. If you ever had this condition before, you are not eligible to participate in this study.
Potentially life-threatening allergic reactions to vaccine components are possible. Since the vaccine may contain a limited quantity of egg protein, this protein can induce immediate hypersensitivity reactions among person who have severe allergy. Allergic reactions include hives, swelling, and allergic asthma, and can spread rapidly. There may be other unknown side effects.
The licensed H1N1 vaccine is approved by the FDA for prevention of H1N1 influenza. Receiving it may protect you from this type of flu. However, you may receive no benefit from taking part in this part of the study. The research may give us knowledge that may help people in the future.
The study informed consent that you signed before joining the study includes information about the following topics: Study Risks Collection and Use of Stored Samples Genetic Testing
This and other information in the enrollment study consent also applies if you agree to get the licensed H1N1 vaccine or have extra research blood collections. A study clinician will review this information with you again before you consent to receive the optional inactivated H1N1 vaccine injection.
If you consent to the inactivated H1N1 vaccine injection, you will be compensated $175 for any extra visit (not already on your schedule) that does not include an injection but does include a research blood draw and $275 for the visit that includes the injection. The approximate total additional compensation may be up to $625. When results of an NIH research study are reported in medical journals or at scientific meetings, the people who take part are not named and identified. In most cases, the NIH will not release any information about your research involvement without your written permission. However, if you sign a release of information form, for example, for an insurance company, the NIH will give the insurance company information from your medical record. This information might affect (either favorably or unfavorably) the willingness of the insurance company to sell you insurance. The Federal Privacy Act protects the confidentiality of your NIH medical records. However, you should know that the Act allows release of some information from your medical record without your permission, for example, if it is required by the Food and Drug Administration (FDA), members of Congress, law enforcement officials, or other authorized people such as the vaccine manufacturer and the study sponsor.
The Clinical Center will provide short-term medical care for any injury resulting from your participation in research here. In general, no long-term medical care or financial compensation for research-related injuries will be provided by the National Institutes of Health, the Clinical Center, or the Federal Government. However, you have the right to pursue legal remedy if you believe that your injury justifies such action. For comparison and to assess whether or not future VRC vaccine studies should use the severity grading table issued in an FDA guidance document (http://www.fda.gov/cber/gdlns/toxvac.htm), the adverse events in this study will also be scored by the guidance document table. However, these severities grades will not be used for formal regulatory reporting or when applying pause rules or SAE reporting rules. This comparison of severity grading by the two tables is being done for operational research purposes to inform future practices.
In addition to recording severity, each adverse event record will include attribution assessment using the following categories and definitions:
Definitely Related. The adverse event and administration of study agent are related in time, and a direct association can be demonstrated.
Probably Related. The adverse event and administration of study agent are reasonably related in time, and the adverse event is more likely explained by study agent than other causes.
Possibly Related. The adverse event and administration of study agent are reasonably related in time, and the adverse event can be explained equally well by causes other than study agent.
Probably Not/Unlikely Related. A potential relationship between study agent and the adverse event could exist (i.e., the possibility cannot be excluded), but the adverse event is most likely explained by causes other than the study agent.
Unrelated. The adverse event is clearly explained by another cause not related to the study agent. 
If the severity of an AE could fall under either one of two grades (e.g., the severity of an AE could be either Grade 2 or Grade 3), select the higher of the two grades for the AE.
Basic Self-care Functions Adult Activities such as bathing, dressing, toileting, transfer/movement, continence, and feeding.
Activities that are age and culturally appropriate (e.g., feeding self with culturally appropriate eating implement).
Lower limit of normal Medical Intervention Use of pharmacologic or biologic agent(s) for treatment of an AE. (with amended PTT and Seizure grading)
Basic Self-care Functions -Adult: Activities such as bathing, dressing, toileting, transfer/movement, continence, and feeding.
Basic Self-care Functions -Young Children: Activities that are age and culturally appropriate (e.g., feeding self with culturally appropriate eating implement). (with amended PTT and Seizure grading)
Basic Self-care Functions -Adult: Activities such as bathing, dressing, toileting, transfer/movement, continence, and feeding.
Basic Self-care Functions -Young Children: Activities that are age and culturally appropriate (e.g., feeding self with culturally appropriate eating implement). (with amended PTT and Seizure grading)
Basic Self-care Functions -Adult: Activities such as bathing, dressing, toileting, transfer/movement, continence, and feeding.
Basic Self-care Functions -Young Children: Activities that are age and culturally appropriate (e.g., feeding self with culturally appropriate eating implement). (with amended PTT and Seizure grading)
Basic Self-care Functions -Adult: Activities such as bathing, dressing, toileting, transfer/movement, continence, and feeding.
Basic Self-care Functions -Young Children: Activities that are age and culturally appropriate (e.g., feeding self with culturally appropriate eating implement).
Adaptive tasks and desirable activities, such as going to work, shopping, cooking, use of transportation, pursuing a hobby, etc.
Usual Social & Functional Activities -Young Children: Activities that are age and culturally appropriate (e.g., social interactions, play activities, learning tasks, etc. (with amended PTT and Seizure grading)
Basic Self-care Functions -Adult: Activities such as bathing, dressing, toileting, transfer/movement, continence, and feeding.
Basic Self-care Functions -Young Children: Activities that are age and culturally appropriate (e.g., feeding self with culturally appropriate eating implement).
Adaptive tasks and desirable activities, such as going to work, shopping, cooking, use of transportation, pursuing a hobby, etc.
Usual Social & Functional Activities -Young Children: Activities that are age and culturally appropriate (e.g., social interactions, play activities, learning tasks, etc. (with amended PTT and Seizure grading)
Basic Self-care Functions -Adult: Activities such as bathing, dressing, toileting, transfer/movement, continence, and feeding.
Basic Self-care Functions -Young Children: Activities that are age and culturally appropriate (e.g., feeding self with culturally appropriate eating implement).
Adaptive tasks and desirable activities, such as going to work, shopping, cooking, use of transportation, pursuing a hobby, etc.
Usual Social & Functional Activities -Young Children: Activities that are age and culturally appropriate (e.g., social interactions, play activities, learning tasks, etc. (with amended PTT and Seizure grading)
Basic Self-care Functions -Adult: Activities such as bathing, dressing, toileting, transfer/movement, continence, and feeding.
Basic Self-care Functions -Young Children: Activities that are age and culturally appropriate (e.g., feeding self with culturally appropriate eating implement).
Adaptive tasks and desirable activities, such as going to work, shopping, cooking, use of transportation, pursuing a hobby, etc.
Usual Social & Functional Activities -Young Children: Activities that are age and culturally appropriate (e.g., social interactions, play activities, learning tasks, etc. (with amended PTT and Seizure grading)
Basic Self-care Functions -Adult: Activities such as bathing, dressing, toileting, transfer/movement, continence, and feeding.
Basic Self-care Functions -Young Children: Activities that are age and culturally appropriate (e.g., feeding self with culturally appropriate eating implement).
Adaptive tasks and desirable activities, such as going to work, shopping, cooking, use of transportation, pursuing a hobby, etc.
Usual Social & Functional Activities -Young Children: Activities that are age and culturally appropriate (e.g., social interactions, play activities, learning tasks, etc. 