The exact sample size (n) for each experimental group/condition, given as a discrete number and unit of measurement An indication of whether measurements were taken from distinct samples or whether the same sample was measured repeatedly
The statistical test(s) used AND whether they are one-or two-sided Only common tests should be described solely by name; describe more complex techniques in the Methods section.
A description of all covariates tested A description of any assumptions or corrections, such as tests of normality and adjustment for multiple comparisons A full description of the statistics including central tendency (e.g. means) or other basic estimates (e.g. regression coefficient) AND variation (e.g. standard deviation) or associated estimates of uncertainty (e.g. confidence intervals)
For null hypothesis testing, the test statistic (e.g. F, t, r) with confidence intervals, effect sizes, degrees of freedom and P value noted Data analysis CLC Genomics 10 (Qiagen) was used to trim and demultiplex NGS data, MAGeCK software v0.5.7 was used for analysis of the sgRNA sequencing data, Prism 7.0 (GraphPad) was used for plotting graphs and for statistical analysis.
For manuscripts utilizing custom algorithms or software that are central to the research but not yet described in published literature, software must be made available to editors/reviewers upon request. We strongly encourage code deposition in a community repository (e.g. GitHub). See the Nature Research guidelines for submitting code & software for further information.
Data Policy information about availability of data All manuscripts must include a data availability statement. This statement should provide the following information, where applicable:
-Accession codes, unique identifiers, or web links for publicly available datasets -A list of figures that have associated raw data -A description of any restrictions on data availability All relevant data are available from the corresponding authors upon request.
Please select the best fit for your research. If you are not sure, read the appropriate sections before making your selection.
For a reference copy of the document with all sections, see nature.com/authors/policies/ReportingSummary-flat.pdf
All studies must disclose on these points even when the disclosure is negative.
Sample sizes were based on standards in the field, typically 3 independent biological replicates, with each replicate assayed in technical duplicate or triplicate.
Data exclusions No data were excluded from the analysis.
Yes, for example, GNPTAB was a hit in the CRISPR screen for genes important for Ebola infection -this was then validated as infection was impaired in GNPTAB-knockout HAP1 cells, but was restored upon reconstitution of GNPTAB expression.
Randomization Fibroblasts from patient families were studied together, i.e. fibroblasts from father, mother and proband (along with healthy control and NP-C patient cells) were tested back-to-back.
Blinding not relevant to this study.
Reporting for specific materials, systems and methods 
None of the cell lines were formally authenticated in our laboratory.
All cell lines were negative for mycoplasma.
Commonly misidentified lines (See ICLAC register) No commonly misidentified cell lines were used in this study.