In the SIS model individuals can be in one of two epidemiological states: Infected (I) or Susceptible (S). Each disease is characterized by a recovery rate (δ) and an infection contact rate (λ). In an infinite, well-mixed population, the fraction of infected individuals (x) changes in time according to the following differential equation 
denotes the basic reproductive ratio. The value of R 0 determines the stability of these two equilibria: is stable when and unstable when .
We defined a discrete stochastic process describing the disease dynamics associated with the SIS model in a finite population (see Methods) which can be represented as a
Markov chain M with N+1 states [2, 3] , illustrated in the following figure:
Each configuration of the population, which is defined by the number of infected individuals i, corresponds to one state of the Markov chain. In a finite, well-mixed population, Equations M1 and M2 (with r=0) define the transitions between different states. In a dynamical contact network, Equations M1 and M4 define those transitions (assuming that the linking dynamics proceeds much faster than the disease dynamics).
This way, we obtain the following transition matrix for M: 
where each element p kj of P represents the probability of moving from state k to state j during one time step. The state without any infected individual (i=0) is an absorbing state of the Markov chain. In other words, the disease always dies out and once this happens, it never re-appears.
Here, we derive an analytical expression for the average time it takes to reach the single absorbing state of the SIS Markov chain (i.e., the average recovery time). Let us denote by € P i (t) the probability that the disease disappears at time t when starting with i infected individuals at time 0. Hence, the average recovery time is given by [4] €
Equation 1 yields the following recurrence relation for
We multiply both sides of these equations by t and sum from 
which leads to the following recurrence relation for
and for
We introduce a variable ) ,
for which we can derive the following recurrence relation by using Equation 6
Note that this equation is valid for all i=1,…,N-1. Equation 7, on the other hand, can be written as
In the following, we use auxiliary variables 
Combining Equations 9 and 10 leads to the following expression for t 1
such that t i can be written as a function of t 1 as follows .
(12)
The intrinsic stochasticity of the model, resulting from the finiteness of the population, makes the disease disappear from the population after a certain amount of time. As such, the population size plays an important role in the average recovery time associated with a certain disease, a feature we discuss in this section. We consider static networks of different size N, keeping the average degree 
The SI model is mathematically equivalent to the SIS model with , and has been employed to study for instance the dynamics of AIDS. The Markov Chain representing the disease dynamics is therefore defined by transition matrix Equation 1, with for all i. The remaining transition probabilities ( ) are exactly the same as for the SIS model. Disease spreading in an adaptive contact network will therefore be equivalent again to that in a well-mixed population with a transmission probability that is rescaled according to Equation 6 .
Since all equal zero, the Markov Chain has two absorbing states: the canonical one without any infected (i=0) and the one without any susceptible (i=N). The disease will expand continuously as soon as one individual in the population gets infected, ultimately leading to a fully infected population. The average amount of time after which this happens, which we refer to as the average infection time, constitutes the main quantity of interest and can be calculated analytically, as discussed below.
Let us denote by the probability to reach 100% of infected at time t, when starting with i infected individuals at time 0. The average infection time is then given by .
The transition matrix of the Markov Chain yields the following recurrence relation for 
Since , for all , we can write the sums at the right hand side of Equation 14 in terms of and obtain the following recurrence relation for 
The main text discusses how the availability of information regarding the health 
With 13 ends up in the absorbing state with a recovered individuals, starting from a state with i infected and r recovered. We obtain the following recurrence relationship for ,
which reduces to .
The following boundary conditions (28) allow us to compute for every a, i and r.
We adopt the same convention as before and normalize the recovery time scale to 1. In the fast linking limit, the number of infected increases with a rate given by .
The rate with which the number of infected decreases is network independent and equal to 14 .
(32)
The gradient of infection allows us to characterize, once more, when disease expansion will either be most likely or least likely. To do so, we study the partial derivative at .
This equation exceeds zero whenever .
(34)
Note that taking yields the basic reproductive ratio € R 0 A for both SIR and SIS: [1, [5] [6] [7] [8] [9] . On the other hand, the very same factors may also influence an individual's capacity of breaking existing links. Hence, generally speaking, some links will last longer (will be created faster) than others, and the question is to which extent such diversity in individual behavior influences disease dynamics. As pointed out in the discussion, there may be situations in which links cannot be set up or removed randomly. Such features, of course, cannot be captured with the present model.
Here, we address individual diversity by means of numerical simulations. Before, we 