: Antibody immune responses in dromedaries vaccinated with ChAdOx1 MERS assessed by Euroimmun ELISA kits.
Seronegative calves were either immunised with control injections (PBS or ChAdOx1 eGFP), group -C (open circles), or with ChAdOx1 MERS, group -V (green closed circles). Seropositive camels were either immunised with control injections (PBS or ChAdOx1 eGFP), group +C (open square), or with ChAdOx1 MERS, group +V (red closed square). Serum samples from different days post immunisation (d.p.i.) were evaluated in Euroimmun ELISA kits. Infectious camels used as a natural challenge models were also evaluated (black square). Data are plotted before the challenge (A and C) and after the challenge (B and D) with timepoints shown as d.p.i., days post boost (d.p.b.) and days post challenge (d.p.c.). Y: year; +: seropositive; -: seronegative; C: control group; V: vaccinated group. A: Virus titres in MERS-CoV infectious camels used as a natural infection model were evaluated for 14 days post challenge (d.p.c.) using standard curve based RT-qPCR assay to report MERS-CoV GE (TCID 50 /ml). Dotted line represents the detection limit of the assay, which is determined in graph B. B: Viral RNA from a sample with a known TCID 50 /ml titre was utilised to set up the standard curve in RT-qPCR to evaluate the MERS-CoV GE (TCID 50 /ml) titres. The detection limit of the assay was considered as the value of the last dilution before the plateau curve. Coloured circle and square symbols indicate values of negative samples from healthy camel and human, respectively.
d.p.c. A-D: Scores of nasal discharge are reported for the twenty camels in all experimental groups of -C, -V, +C, and +V for 14 d.p.c. E: scores for the ten naturally infectious camels (used as a challenge model). F: average score per group. The scores were recorded as arbitrary units of 0 (normal), 0.25 (recovered), 1 (mild), 2 (moderate), or 3 (severe) depending on the nasal discharge abundance. Statistical analysis on areas under the curve of these scores is presented in Figure 3 . +: seropositive; -: seronegative; C: control group; V: vaccinated group; Co-: co-housed camel. Seronegative dromedary calves, below 1 year old, were immunised with PBS (n=2) or ChAdOx1-eGFP (n=1) in group AG01 (black triangles) or with ChAdOx1 MERS in group AG02 (n=3; blue squares). Older calves, below 2 years old, were immunised with ChAdOx1 MERS in group AG03 (n=3; red circles). Anti-spike antibody levels were assessed in endpoint titre ELISA (A) and Euroimmun ELISA kits (B). Correlation between values in both assays is presented in (C). Linear regression between the antibody titres in the Endpoint ELISA and Euroimmun ELISA ratios showed a significant relationship with R 2 = 0.82 and p < 0.0001; and a significant correlation with Pearson r = 0.90 and p < 0.0001. 
Photographs taken during the course of the study (Reference to this article must be made when citing or sharing these photos). 
Note: Groups: -V (also called G01-N-V); -C (also called G02-N-C); +V (also called G03-S-V); +C (also called G04-S-C) where C: control, V: vaccinated, S: seropositive, N:naïve (seronegative). Cohen's f 2 is used to measure the practical significance of our test, we report the local effect size Cohen's f 2 for repeated-measures[1].