. Library composition statistics: table of read counts per library. Random 7nt sequences were added to the ends of both 5′ and 3′ adaptors during library preparation to facilitate the removal of duplicate reads introduced during PCR. All libraries were de-duplicated following the removal of the adaptor sequences, as described in the Materials and Methods section. Numbers of reads mapped to the forward (fwd) and reverse (rev) strands of the viral gRNA are shown separately in each case; only forward strand-mapping reads are included in the host mRNA counts. Table S3 . RiboSeq reads (RPKM) for individual coding sequences. Note, the 1b values include some reads that likely derive from ribosome-protected fragments (RPFs) at the S ORF overlap, where a large peak contains some reads in the same phase as the 1b ORF. In the ribosomal frameshifting calculations of Figure 3 , reads in overlapping regions were excluded from the calculations. Table S4 . Top 20 most significantly enriched GO terms among genes which are down-regulated in IBV M41-CK-infected cells relative to IBV Beau-R-infected cells. Column "Annotated" shows the total number of genes in the data set which are members of that GO term; "Significant" shows the number that are significantly differentially expressed; and "Expected" shows the proportion of genes that would be expected to occur in a random sample. Table S5 . Top 20 most significantly enriched GO terms among genes which are up-regulated in IBV M41-CK-infected cells relative to IBV Beau-R-infected cells. Column "Annotated" shows the total number of genes in the data set which are members of that GO term; "Significant" shows the number that are significantly differentially expressed; and "Expected" shows the proportion of genes that would be expected to occur in a random sample. indicates the presence of fusion evidence; a green line represents neighborhood evidence; a blue line represents co-ocurrence evidence; a purple line represents experimental evidence; a yellow line represents text-mining evidence; a light blue line represents database evidence; and a black line represents co-expression evidence.