(50 camels sampled) in Ordos (Table 1) . Serum and nasal swab samples were collected from each camel.
The presence or absence of MERS-CoV neutralizing antibodies in the serum samples was determined by using a recombinant chimeric vesicular stomatitis virus (VSV), rVSVDG/S-eGFP. This virus was generated by using reverse genetics and was based on rVSV-eGFP, a recombinant VSV expressing enhanced green fluorescence protein (eGFP). 8 In the genome of rVSV-eGFP, the ORF of VSV G was replaced with that of MERS-CoV spike protein (S). rVSVDG/S-eGFP can infect host cells by utilizing MERS-CoV S to mediate viral attachment and entry; expression of eGFP is an indicator of the infection. Serum from a recombinant Newcastle disease virus expressing MERS-CoV S (rNDV-MERS-CoV-S)-immunized camel served as a control. The method for generating rNDV-MERS-CoV-S was described previously. 9 Neutralization titers were expressed as the reciprocal of the highest dilution of serum that showed at least 50% inhibition of infection with rVSVDG/S-eGFP. All serum samples and the control serum from pre-immunized camels had neutralization antibody titers against rVSVDG/S-eGFP of less than 1:2. In contrast, the control serum from the rNDV-MERS-CoV-S immunized camel yielded neutralization antibody titer of 1:512. An enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay was also carried out to test for MERS-CoVspecific antibodies in serum samples. Vero E6 cells were infected with rVSVDG/S-eGFP, and the lysate of infected Vero E6 cells was used as the coating antigen for the ELISA. Specific antibody binding to MERS-CoV S was detected with HRP-conjugated Protein A and visualized by adding 3,39,5,59-tetramethylbenzidine substrate. All serum samples and control sera from pre-immunized camels yielded OD 450 values of between 0.17 and 0.29; however, the control serum from the postimmunized camel yielded OD 450 value of 0.51. The swab samples were tested by using real-time polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) targeted to ORF1a of the MERS-CoV genome in accordance with the World Health Organisation protocol. 10 The results showed that all of the samples were negative for MERS-CoV ORF1a RNA.
In the present study, a total of 190 Bactrian camels from 10 herds were sampled in three areas of the West IMAR of China, where over 40% of the Bactrian camels in China are raised. All 190 serum and swab samples were negative for MERS CoV S-specific neutralizing antibody, ELISA antibody, and MERS-CoV RNA. Our results indicate that there is no MERS-CoV circulating among Bactrian camels in the West IMAR. The absence of MERS-CoV infection in Bactrian camels in other areas of China should be confirmed through further surveillance studies.