The manuscript "A novel pathway of virus dissemination within the host: spread of porcine epidemic diarrhea virus (PEDV) from the nasal cavity to the intestinal mucosa in swine" describes an alternative possible pathogenesis route by which Porcine Epidemic Diarrhea virus (PEDV) can result in active infection. The authors demonstrate that the intranasal infection of pigs results in typical clinical signs of PEDV, and provide insight on the possible role of dendritic cells in the nasal cavity to transfer virus to T lymphocytes that then possibly work as carriers to the active site of infection (intestines). The aerosol transmission of PEDV has been previously speculated as an important factor to disseminate the virus. However, although PEDV was found in aerosol particles, transmission and active replication was not demonstrated in previous studies. This manuscript provides novel evidence to the mechanism in which PEDV could reach the active site of replication if infection was not initiated by the oral route. The methodology was thorough and well performed, but clarity needs to be improved for parts of the methods and most of the results/figures. Specific comments are mentioned below.
Porcine jejunum epithelial cell line (IPEC-J2) is mentioned for the transfer experiment methods, but results are not shown. These results are crucial to confirm the ability of T lymphocytes to transfer PEDV to intestinal cells, as they are a host-specific cell line and provide results that can be better extrapolated to what happens in vivo than Vero cells. Also, for the NEC-DC and DC-T cell co-culture studies, were there controls to compare the direct infection of DC and T lymphocytes? Does it result in higher percentage of infected cells if they are directly infected? The authors mention that large amounts of virus were transferred from infected Vero cells to T cells. Is this a hypothesis for the higher virus titers in the supernatant of the transfer experiment at 96hrs? Please explain.
Overall the manuscript is well written, but I believe it would be benefited if edited for proper grammar and spelling. Some examples are listed below: L98: Replace "are possessing" by possess. L133: "Different parts of the body" should be replaced by different organs or tissues. L143: Remove "subsequently". L146-147: were detected in the jejunum and ileum at higher levels than in other tissues. L149: nasal mucosa of piglets were isolated at different time points after intranasal infection. L158-160: in which most DCs and other lymphocytes accumulated L189: Remove while. The word was used unnecessarily in additional sentences in the manuscript. L216: After 12h post administration of PEDV. By using the expression "for 12h" seems that the infection lasted 12h.
The methodology and presentation of results are often confusing, mostly due to the excessive use of abbreviations, poorly described figures, or lack of descriptive details. The figures and results contradict the methods section at times. This could be an obstacle for reproducibility of the work. Some examples are given below: L106-107: Following sacrifice for macroscopic examination at PIDs 3. Was this at 3 days post infection? If so, there was no mention that animals were euthanized at 3 days post-infection. Overall, the initial experiment for clinical signs (oral and nasal inoculation) was not well described. The methods for the co-culture of NEC and DC are not complete of how NEC were collected and the procedure for infection, most of the information is only mentioned on the figure legend but is not necessarily clear. Abbreviations are used extensively and loosely. Some were not described at all (e.g. PID, TEER in the supplementary figure only). And even those that were mentioned previously, if not commonly known or extensively repeated in the manuscript, the meaning should be reinforced. Some are mentioned in the methods section but will need to be mentioned in the results too.
Because of the way the manuscript is structured (results before the methods), I believe it would be more clear and easier to follow results if before displaying the findings, a brief explanation was given of why a particular assay was done. The targets and reason of antibodies/ markers used should be mentioned when describing antibodies, assuming the reader will not be familiar with all of them. The 1h time point shown for the PEDV infection/transmission is confusing. The methods describe co-culture for 2h. Please describe timepoints in figure legends more clearly.
Legends are not clear, it is necessary to re-check methods and text frequently to understand figures. What is shown in the figures should be more clearly explained. In several instances, the panels are too small and difficult to visualize, most frequently for fluorescent staining. Fig 3: Position of letters indicating panels are not correct within a sentence, which makes it confusing. Replace electron microscopy (G) by electron microscopy (E). Fig S3: the order of letters for panels are not correct, and not all are mentioned. Fig. 4 : What is the PEDV 4째C? Fig. 6 : the time points shown in A and B panels are different. Co-culture was for 2hs, not for 1h as mentioned. Asterisks are black, not white and there are only arrowheads, not arrows. The sentence "as previously described" is used several times without referencing.
Reviewer #2 (Remarks to the Author):
This manuscript describes the detail of a novel pathogenic pathway for porcine epidemic diarrhea virus infection in pigs. While an aerosol transmission of virus has been hypothesised previously, this manuscript offers evidence to support the hypothesis, in the form on in vivo and in vitro infections and dissemination studies. The level of detail in this investigation opens new avenues for research in this area, as well as stimulating further consideration of PED transmission in the field. The manuscript is well structured and the figures are well presented to support the results and discussion. Some additional detail in the methods section would be useful: 1) Lines 559-561: Please indicate how much virus was used here. 2) Lines 568-570: What sex animals were used? 3) Lines 598-600 and 604-608: Please specify how the randomisation was carried out. 4) Lines 600-602: Please indicate details of the nasal spray device used. 5) Lines 603-604: Were any welfare checks carried out on the animals to minimise unnecessary suffering? 6) Lines 651-653 and 718-719: Please indicate the instrument used for flow cytometry analysis. 7) Lines 673-675: Please indicate the site of the IV injection. 8) Line 702: Please specify the type of cells was used for the plaque assay. 9) Lines 728-731: Please specify which tissues were collected for this analysis.
As a very minor point, the reference format used in lines 53-54 is inconsistent with the rest of the manuscript.
Title No viral protein and infectious virus particle was detected in the IPEC-J2 in both the noncontact and direct contact groups throughout the study (Fig.   R1 ). In additional studies, IPEC-J2 did not appear to be susceptible to PEDV, consistent with the previous reports 1 . After PEDV infection, no infectious virus particles were released in the cell culture supernatant (Fig.   R2A ), and the viral RNA and protein in IPEC-J2 cells gradually disappeared over time ( Fig. R2B and C) . We did not think that IPEC-J2 could be used as an appropriate cell model for transfer infection experiments. Therefore, these results were not included in the article. We will also delete the corresponding content in the Materials and Methods section of the manuscript. Additionally, we conducted experiments to study PEDV infection in T cells. A higher percentage of PEDV + CD3 + T cells (Fig. R3B ) was detected in the direct infection group compared with that in the DC/T coculture system (Fig. 6C ). If you find it necessary, we will add this result to the manuscript; we would appreciate your suggestions. h of coculture, particularly in the contact group, and as much as 51.9% of PEDV + CD3 + T cells were detected. However, our data are insufficient to confirm the conclusion about large amounts of virus were transferred from infected Vero cells to T cells. We need apologize for our hasty conclusion. We have conducted a complementary experiment to prove that PEDV could be transferred from infected Vero cells to T cells (Fig.   R4 ). If you find it necessary, we will include the relevant information in the revised manuscript as supplementary material. We appreciate your useful suggestion. Thanks. A: I apologize for our mistake. We have replaced electron microscopy (G) with electron microscopy (E).
2) Fig S3: the order of letters for panels are not correct, and not all are mentioned.
A: Thanks for your suggestion. We have corrected the order of the letters in Fig S3. 3) Fig. 4 : What is the PEDV 4째C?
A: Thanks for your careful review. PEDV 4째C means that the NECM/DC coculture system was cultured at 4째C after PEDV infection. We have added the specific description to the legend of A: We completely agree with your opinion. We have moved the last sentence to the next paragraph.
10) The sentence "as previously described" is used several times without referencing.
A: I apologize for the missing references. We have added the relevant references. Thanks. A: I am sorry for the missing details. We inoculate PEDV at a MOI of 1. We have added the missing information in this sentence.
2) Lines 568-570: What sex animals were used?
A: Thanks for your suggestion. We used female piglets for the animal experiment. We have added the missing information in this sentence.
3) Lines 598-600 and 604-608: Please specify how the randomisation was carried out.
A: Thanks for your helpful suggestions. We chose and grouped the animals using the random number generation function of EXCEL.
We have added the missing information in both sentences. A: I apologize for the missing information. We used Vero cells for the plaque assay. We have added the cell type in this section. 9) Lines 728-731: Please specify which tissues were collected for this analysis.
A: Thanks for your suggestion. We have added the specific tissues collected for IHC analysis in this section.
10) As a very minor point, the reference format used in lines 53-54 is inconsistent with the rest of the manuscript.