The Middle-East and Africa Influenza Surveillance Network (MENA-ISN), established in 2014, includes 15 countries at present. Country representatives presented their influenza surveillance programmes, vaccine coverage and influenza control actions achieved, and provided a list of country surveillance/control objectives for the upcoming 3 years. This report details the current situation of influenza surveillance and action plans to move forward in MENA-ISN countries. Data were presented at the 8th MENA-ISN meeting, organized by the Mérieux Foundation that was held on 10-11 April 2018 in Cairo, Egypt. The meeting included MENA-ISN representatives from 12 countries (Algeria, Egypt, Jordan, Kenya, Lebanon, Libya, Morocco, Pakistan, Saudi Arabia, South Africa, Tunisia and United Arab Emirates) and experts from the Canadian Centre for Vaccinology, and the World Health Organization. Meeting participants concluded that influenza remains a significant threat especially in high-risk groups (children under-5, elderly, pregnant women and immunosuppressed individuals) in the MENA-ISN re-
gion. Additional funding and planning are required by member countries to contain this threat. Future meetings will need to focus on creative and innovative ways to inform policy and initiatives for vaccination, surveillance and management of influenza-related morbidity and mortality especially among the most vulnerable groups of the population. The MENA-ISN roadmap is now available to help achieving the network's goals.
Emerging infectious diseases are a major public health problem in the EMR region. Besides, more than half of the 22 countries of the EMR are affected by acute or protracted complex emergencies. Elderly individuals are also at high risk of influenza-related hospitalization and death. 6, 7 Frailty is defined as "a state of increased vulnerability to poor resolution of homoeostasis after a stressor event", which increases the risk of adverse outcomes, 8 found to reduce hospital admission with respiratory illness [16] [17] [18] and to be cost-saving. 19, 20 Finally, a recombinant influenza vaccine has been shown to provide a better protection in older adults than the standard quadrivalent, inactivated influenza vaccine. 21 At present, the availability of these newer vaccine products is limited in many settings, and where available, they may be cost-prohibitive. With this in mind, implementing a realistic vaccination strategy with available product in order to improve influenza vaccine coverage should be considered as the first-line strategy with whatever influenza vaccine available in a given country.
In summary, despite enhanced influenza surveillance systems, a higher number of NICs that actively perform influenza virus typing and more available information on influenza burden in the region, the current situation is not satisfactory. Key challenges for the future are sustainability, good quality data and more privateacademic collaborations under a common scientific umbrella. A unified group of committed national experts, that is MENA-ISN with joint multisectoral and multidisciplinary efforts, will help to get further than individual efforts. The network can be the active advocate for acceptance of vaccination by HCPs and the public, by bringing key local stockholders together, explaining benefits of seasonal influenza vaccination and addressing misinformation.
Dissemination of surveillance and disease burden data through publications and effective communication tools will help to push health authorities in favour of official recommendations for influenza vaccination.
This work was supported by Fondation Mérieux and an unrestricted grant from Sanofi Pasteur.
The authors declare no conflict of interest to report.
Mitra Saadatian-Elahi https://orcid.org/0000-0003-1265-8806
Sibongile Walaza https://orcid.org/0000-0001-7588-2480