The goal of the study is to build an Alignment-free tool for sequence clustering. To demonstrate the efficiency of our method we compared the phylogenetic trees and the distance matrices generated by our method with the other freely available recent methods [1] . The superiority of the clustering performance of our method can be noticed in the following trees. We can see the superiority of efficient clustering of the sequences across all the benchmark datasets as compared to the other methods.
: Accuracy classification of AUC [2, 3, 4, 5, 6] .
A low AUC value does not necessarily suggest a bad or poor model; rather it simply suggests that, besides the accounted predictors, other factors also exercise influence on the response variable. It is evident from the ROC plots below that our method's performance is in good agreement with other methods.
In summary, our method performs similarly in terms of statistical measurements (ROC and AUC) with the other methods. However, the phylogenetic trees generated by our method and the other freely available recent methods [1] shows superiority of our method over the other methods in terms of sequence clustering.
The phylogenetic tree is generated by a distance matrix which is equal to (1-similarity matrix), equation (12) in our manuscript. We took similarity matrix for ROC analysis. In similarity matrix, we assigned positive label, if the two sequences belong to same class (i.e., family level classification, phylum level classification, genus level classification, etc.,) otherwise assigned negative label. We generated the ROC curve by varying decision threshold between the minimum and maximum values of the similarity matrix and plotted the FPR (false positive rate) on X-axis and TPR (true positive rate) on Y-axis. Each point in the ROC curve corresponds to a discrete classifier that can be obtained using a given decision threshold (Figure 3 in [7] ). After plotting ROC curve, we calculated the area under the ROC curve (AUC).
Phylogenetic tree on NADH Dehydrogenase 5 (ND 5) protein sequences. The phylogenetic tree ( Figure 1 ) generated by our method successfully clustered sequences belonged to family Hominidae which includes human, pigmy chimpanzee, common chimpanzee and gorilla in one clades and outgrouped opossum, which is missing in phylogenetic trees generated by other freely available tools [1] (Figures 2,3 ,4,5 and 6). This shows the advantage of our method over others in terms of sequence clustering. Moreover, the AUC of our method is 0.97 (Figure 7 ), which indicates that our method has high accuracy ( Phylogenetic tree on NADH Dehydrogenase 6 (ND 6) protein sequences. The phylogenetic tree ( Figure 8 ) generated by our method successfully clustered sequences belonging to family Hominidae which includes human, common chimpanzee and gorilla in one clades, which is missing in phylogenetic trees generated by other freely available tools [1] (Figures 9,10,11,12 and 13), which again shows the advantage of our method over others in terms of clustering. The AUC of our method is 0.98 ( Figure 14 ), which indicates that our method has high accuracy ( Table 1 ) and approximately same with other AUC's. 50 Coronavirus sequences were divided into four groups (Figure 15 ), where group I and II contains mammalian coronaviruses, group III contain avian coronaviruses and group IV contain SARS-CoVs. The phylogenetic tree (Figure 15 ) generated by our method put sequences belong to group I close to each other, which is missing in phylogenetic trees (Figures 16, 17, 18, 19 and 20) generated by other freely available tools [1] . Rest of the groups are properly clustered by all the methods. This shows the advantage of our method over others in terms of clustering. The AUC of our method is 0.96 (Figure 21 ), which indicates that our method has high accuracy ( Phylogenetic tree on 50 Beta-globin protein sequences. The phylogenetic trees constructed by our method (Figure 22 ) successfully clustered mammalian beta-globin protein sequences and primates in separate clades which are not observed in phylogenetic trees generated by other freely available tools [1] (Figures 23,24,25,26 and 27). This shows the advantage of our method over others based on clustering. The AUC of our method is 0.91 ( Figure 28 ), which indicates that our method has high accuracy ( Phylogenetic tree on 24 Transferrin protein sequences. The phylogenetic trees constructed by our method (Figure 29 ) clustered sequences from mammalia in a separate clade which was not observed in phylogenetic trees generated by other freely available tools [1] (Figures 30, 31, 32, 33 and 34 ). This shows superiority of our method. Similarly, AUC of our method is 0.85 (Figure 35 ), which indicates that our method has moderate accuracy (Table 1) and similar with other AUC's. Phylogenetic tree on Xylanases protein sequences in the F10 and G11 datasets. The above trees generated by our method and the other freely available recent methods [1] shows superiority of our method in terms of clustering over other methods. The sequences we used were Xylanases proteins from two different families F10 and G11. The tree generated by our method (Figure 36 ) distinctly clusters two families in two different clades, which is missing in all the other trees ( Figures 37, 38, 39, 40 and 41). This shows the advantage of our method over others. Similarly, AUC of our method is 0.89 (Figure 42 ), which indicates that our method has moderate accuracy ( Table 1) .