We used a stochastic SEIR-type model ( Figure 1) , with the addition of compartments for the number of unburied dead bodies (which form a significant source of transmission, if there are interactions with the dead body, as is common in various funeral rites) and the number of safely buried dead bodies (assumed to no longer contribute to transmission). All individuals are initially susceptible to infection (S). Once infected, they enter a latent incubation stage (E), from which they transition to become infectious, but not yet symptomatic (I 0 ). At the point of developing symptoms (I), their infectiousness increases. Post-infection, individuals either recover and are no longer infectious (R) or die and remain infectious (D) until buried (B).
Tables 1 and 2 define, respectively, the states and parameters (together with base values) used in our model of Ebola virus disease transmission. Equations 1-30 specify the deterministic disease transmission model, which were used to define the transition probabilities for the discrete-time Markov chain model that we used to obtain stochastic outbreak realisations. Table 3 defines time-varying quantities that appear in the model equations. 
All compartments are initially set to zero, except for the susceptible community and health care worker populations, and the initially-exposed individuals (Equations 1-3). The deterministic equations (4-22) define the transition probabilities for the discrete-time stochastic infection model that was used to generate the results presented in the accompanying manuscript.
The force of infection in the community (Equation 23) and in the health care workforce (Equation 24) are time-varying quantities that depend on disease prevalence. The number of individuals that have become subject to contact tracing at each time step (Equation 25) depends on the available contact tracing capacity (subject to the effective health care capacity and the number of contacts already being traced) and on the number of cases that ascertained in that time step (Equation 26). Infected contacts, identified at a rate κ I per identified case, are drawn from E C and I 0,C in proportion to the number of people in these two states (Equation 27 ).
The fraction of health care workers that are hospitalised and enter H H rather than I H (Equation 28) depends upon the effective number of beds and the number of occupied beds (H H and H C ). The fraction of community cases that are hospitalised and enter H C rather than I C (Equation 29) depends upon the effective number of beds and the number of occupied beds including health care workers that were hospitalised during this time step.
The effective health care capacity, expressed as a fraction of the actual capacity, is a function of the available health care workforce (Equation 30) and is illustrated in Figure 2 . This equation smoothly decreases health care capacity due to infection of health care workers, both as a direct consequence of infection and, for uninfected health care workers, due to perceived risk of infection as a consequence of providing health care services. This relationship is defined using the quantile (percent point) function for the Beta distribution (Beta PPF , for α = β = 0.01), chosen solely on the grounds that it has the desired shape.
The case ascertainment probability p asc (t) was kept fixed at 0 until a pre-defined number of individuals F D became symptomatic (i.e., transitioned to I C , I H , or H H ), at which point the first detected case was defined have occurred and p asc (t) became non-zero (as defined in the simulation scenario tables, below).
At each time-step, the outflow from each compartment is sampled from a Poisson distribution whose mean value is the deterministic outflow rate (as defined by the equations below). Where these outflows are delivered to multiple destination compartments subject to a probability (e.g., the ascertainment of cases leaving I 0,C with probability p asc ), the division of the outflow is sampled from a binomial distribution. Where an outflow is delivered to multiple destination compartments subject to capacity constraints (e.g., the hospitalisation and home-based quarantine of ascertained cases leaving I 0,C ), priority is determined by strata; health-care workers receive the highest priority, followed by monitored cases, followed by cases in the general community. The remaining outflows, if any, are sent elsewhere (e.g., the overflow of ascertained cases from I 0,C is delivered to I C , and the overflow of cases from I 0,H is delivered to I H ). Available health care workforce (%) Effective health care capacity (%) For each combination of parameters listed in Table 4 , we simulated 1,000 model realisations.
Symbol Value(s)
10%, 20%, . . . , 80% D 0, 7, 14, . . . , 56 F HCW 0.001 FD 5, 10, 25, 50 For each combination of parameters listed in Table 5 , we simulated 1,000 model realisations. For each combination of parameters listed in Table 6 , we simulated 1,000 model realisations.
Symbol Value(s) For each combination of parameters listed in Table 7 , we simulated 1,000 model realisations.
p asc 0 † -70% R 10%, 25%, 50%, 75%, 90% D 0, 7, 14, . . . , 56
, 10, 25, 50 For each combination of parameters listed in Table 8 , we simulated 1,000 model realisations.
Symbol Values(s) p asc 0 † -10%, 20%, . . . , 50% FD 5, 10, 25, 50 Table 10 : The administrative regions of Papua New Guinea, except that we separate Port Moresby (the largest city and national capital) from the rest of the Southern ("Papua") region on the grounds that Port Moresby comprises a much more urbanised population than the rest of the region.
For each combination of parameters listed in Table 9 , and for each of the administrative regions listed in Table 10 , we simulated 1,000 model realisations.
We also explored the effect of international interventions that supported local health care systems by delivering additional isolation beds and health care workers. Two different intervention scenarios were considered:
A rapid but small intervention that delivers an additional 100 beds and 100 health care workers two weeks after the first case is detected ("Small"); and
A slower but larger intervention that delivers an additional 1,000 beds and 1,000 health care workers eight weeks after the first case is detected ("Large").
These two interventions were compared against the baseline scenario where no additional health care resources were made available ("None"). The results for each of the administrative regions (Table 10 ) are shown in Figures 3-7. In summary, while these interventions provide modest reductions in the frequency of uncontrolled outbreaks in some scenarios, they confer limited benefit compared to the behavioural interventions (reduction in transmission associated with community contacts and dead bodies) reported in the manuscript. In the absence of any intervention ("None"), uncontrolled outbreaks rarely occur if case ascertainment is 50%; the interventions are able to prevent uncontrolled outbreaks in these circumstances. The interventions provide little benefit when case ascertainment is 40%, and provide negligible benefit when case ascertainment is 30% or lower. By sampling the number of secondary cases from a Poisson distribution, the model presented here may under-estimate the actual variation in the number of secondary cases [1] . We can instead sample the number of secondary cases using probability distributions with means defined by the deterministic model equations (presented above) but which are over-dispersed with respect to the Poisson. The negative binomial distribution is frequently used in ecology and epidemiology, because it allows the mean and variance to be controlled independently.
The dispersion parameter k controls the variance: as k increases the variance decreases and the distribution approaches the Poisson (see Figure 8 ). When the number of secondary cases is highly dispersed (given a fixed mean), the likelihood of fade-out is increased, and uncontrolled outbreaks are observed less frequently and may have greater variation in their final size.
Toth et al. fitted negative binomial distributions to transmission data from the West Africa EVD outbreak as of April 24, 2015 (n = 56) and estimated the reproductive number R and dispersion parameter k for different patient subgroups [2] . Estimates of k produced wide confidence intervals, from values as low as 0.03 to larger values (> 1) consistent with the Poisson, and the authors selected three values of k for analysis: 0.1, 1, 10. We re-ran the model simulations for the urban population of Port Moresby, where the force of infection was reduced in the community and/or from dead bodies for these same values: k = 10 (Figure 10 ), k = 1 ( Figure 11 ) and k = 0.1 (Figure 12 ). The results produced by the original model are shown in Figure 9 .
The results for k = 10 and k = 1 do not differ substantially from those produced by the original model, although the proportion of simulations that result in fade-out or controlled epidemics is slightly higher when k = 1 than when k = 10. When k = 0.1 the likelihood of fade-out is higher in all scenarios than is observed for larger values of k. There is also a much greater chance of controlled epidemics, even in the absence of any reduction in the force of infection (i.e., the "Baseline"). However, the relative effects of case ascertainment and interventions are still observed. 