The severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS) epidemic threw the world into turmoil during the first half of 2003. Many subsequent papers have addressed its impact on health service utilization, but few have considered palliative (hospice) care. The aim of the present study was to describe changes in hospice inpatient utilization during and after the SARS epidemic in 2003 in Taiwan.
The severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS) epidemic threw the world into turmoil during the first half of 2003 [1, 2] . Since then, thousands of papers had been devoted to this novel virus, many have addressed its impact on health service utilization [3] [4] [5] [6] [7] [8] , but few have focused on hospice palliative care [9] . When the fears declined and utilization data became available, we were able retrospectively to review the broad hospice situation during the SARS epidemic in Taiwan, one of the most heavily affected countries.
The first inpatient hospice ward in Taiwan was established in 1990 [10] . By the end of 2004, there were 26 hospice wards with 424 beds and 42 units for hospice home care [11] . All hospice care programs in Taiwan until then had been hospital-based. A universal health insurance program started in Taiwan in 1995 and now covers nearly all inhabitants (21,984,415 beneficiaries at the end of 2003, equivalent to a coverage rate of 97.3%) [12] . During the early years of National Health Insurance (NHI), admission to hospice wards was reimbursed on a fee-for-service basis, as in acute wards. The payment for services of nurses and other ancillary staff was included in the room fee. This method of reimbursement put the intensive-care hospice at a great disadvantage. After years of negotiation, the Bureau of National Health Insurance began to implement a special program for hospice wards in July 2000. The payment changed to a per-diem lump sum and was generally improved. Any hospice ward was free to join the new program, which also had stricter requirements on personnel and facilities.
The first case of SARS in Taiwan was identified on 14 March 2003 [13] . Until 21 April, only 28 probable SARS cases were reported. After 22 April, the incidence abruptly increased and was associated primarily with health-care settings. Moreover, in many cities and regions of Taiwan, the infection spread from one hospital to several others. Five hospitals had to discontinue routine or emergency services totally. Stricter quarantine was implemented after 28 April. Real panic ensued in Taiwanese society. The last probable case was reported on 14 June, and Taiwan was removed from the list of SARS-affected countries by the World Health Organization on 5 July 2003 [14] . In retrospect, the SARS epidemic in Taiwan had involved 668 probable cases with severe deterioration of pulmonary function and 181 deaths [15] .
The aim of the current study was to describe the changes in hospice inpatient utilization during and after the SARS epidemic within the NHI program in Taiwan. Such quantitative analyses might provide evidence for discussion in health policy-making and help with effective planning in the future.
In 1999, the Bureau of National Health Insurance began to release all claims data to the public in electronic form under the National Health Insurance Research Database (NHIRD) project [16] . Since then, dozens of extracted datasets have been available to researchers. The identification numbers of persons and healthcare facilities in the datasets have been encrypted to protect privacy. The encryption is consistent across all datasets so that longitudinal comparisons are feasible. However, no linkage with external databases and medical records was possible. Researchers who wish to access NHIRD datasets must sign a user agreement form indicating that they will obey relevant regulations and acknowledge the NHIRD in their publications.
In the current study, we used the complete inpatient admission datasets from 2000 to 2003 (DD{2000..2003} {01..12}.DAT). Each record in the admission file contains the data for one admission, including the re-coded identification numbers of the patient and hospital, type of benefits, dates of admission and discharge, five discharge diagnoses, and items of expenditure. We also used the registry for contracted medical facilities (HOSB2003.DAT) to identify the accreditation levels and locations of the hospitals with hospice wards, and the registry for contracted beds (BED2003.DAT) to compute the number of beds in each hospice ward.
To begin with, we extracted the admission records for hospice wards according to the type of benefit. Twenty-five hospitals had participated in the NHI hospice program: from 12 hospitals in July 2000 to 21 in December 2003, during which time 4 hospitals dropped out. After computing the utilization of hospice beds for each day, we found that there were indeed cyclic fluctuations around the year. Because data were only available for a few years and the numbers of hospice wards and beds had increased over time, it did not seem appropriate to deploy a conventional time series analysis, e.g. the autoregressive integrated moving average method [3, 4, 17] . Instead, we performed a before-and-after comparison of monthly utilizations between 2002 and 2003 and plotted daily utilization. The analysis was limited to those hospitals that offered hospice inpatient services throughout the whole of 2002 and 2003. Because insurance claims were normally submitted after the patients' discharge, the claims for the final month of the available datasets contained no data for patients who were still hospitalised at the end of that month. Thus, the data for December 2003 were not analysed.
We extended the before-and-after comparison to the totality of hospital beds within the National Health Insurance to contrast with the utilization of hospice wards. To indicate the situation in individual hospice wards, we computed the changes of utilization in each hospice ward separately during and after the SARS epidemic. These data were further stratified by the accreditation levels and locations of the hospice wards. We also analysed the patients who were admitted to hospice wards during the peak period of the SARS epidemic (i.e. May/June 2003) and compared them with the patients admitted during the same months of the previous year. This latter analysis included age, sex, and primary diagnosis at discharge and was also stratified by ward accreditation level and location.
The Perl programming language (version 5.8.7) was used for the extraction and computation of data [18] . The unit of hospice/hospital ward utilization was the patient-day, i.e. each claimed day of hospitalisation. Conventionally, the discharge day is not counted as a hospitalisation day in insurance claims. For example, if a patient was hospitalised from 1 January to 7 January, the per-diem fees for physician and room services were payable only from 1 January to 6 January. We used two-sample t-tests to compare the age distributions of those admitted in May/June 2003 with those admitted in May/June 2002, and Pearson's chi-square test to compare the sex and diagnosis distributions. We also used one-way analysis of variance to compare the age distributions of those admitted in May/ June 2003 to hospice wards of different accreditation levels and locations. A P-value < 0.05 was regarded as statistically significant. The statistical analyses were performed using SPSS software (Release 13.0 for Windows, 2004, SPSS Inc., Chicago). Taiwan The influence of the SARS epidemic on hospice utilization varied widely among the 15 wards studied (Table 1) . Even during the peak period of the epidemic, three wards showed growth in utilization and one was unchanged, while two seemed temporarily to cease operating. The recovery also varied from ward to ward: two months after the epidemic, four wards still showed a reduction in utilization of more than 20%.
In total, 566 patients were admitted to hospice wards in May/June 2003, in contrast to 818 admissions in May/ June 2002. The gender, age and diagnosis distributions did not differ between patient groups in these two years ( Table 2) .
Of the 15 wards, eight were located in academic medical centres, six in metropolitan hospitals, and one in a local community hospital. As to geographic location, six were located in northern Taiwan, two in the middle of the country, six in the south and one in the east (Table 3) .
During the peak period of the SARS epidemic, hospice wards in academic medical centres were affected more severely than those in metropolitan hospitals (-60.4% vs. Among the 566 patients admitted to hospice wards during the peak of the epidemic, the gender and age distributions did not differ among patient groups in academic medical centres, metropolitan hospitals or the local community hospital ( Table 4 ). The gender distribution did not differ among patient groups in different locations, but the age distribution did (Table 5 ).
Most studies of the impact of SARS on health service utilization have been confined to a single facility. Our study, based on nationwide data, gave a complete and exact picture of hospice utilization. The hospice, also known as palliative care, has usually been considered as conserva- Hospital Hospice tive and non-acute. One could well imagine that the use of hospice services would be compromised because of fears during uncertain times. Our findings support this view. Hospice inpatient utilization in Taiwan was indeed more sensitive to the emerging epidemic than general inpatient utilization. Not only was the reduction sharper, but also recovery to the previous level took longer.
Although it cannot be classed as acute care, hospice care is unlike elective surgery, which can put patients on a long waiting list. Hospice care is provided to terminally ill patients whose life expectancy is limited. During the SARS epidemic in Taiwan, many terminally ill patients might have been suspended or deterred from professional hospice care because well-organized patient transfers did not exist. Health consequences might not be a big issue among hospice patients. Instead, quality of care and humanity are the major concerns. The aggregate utilization of the 15 hospice wards during the peak period of the SARS epidemic in Taiwan was lower than that during the Chinese New Year holidays ( Figure  1 ). Like Christmas to Christians, the Chinese New Year holidays are important to most Chinese as occasions of family reunion. Usually hospital activities are kept to a minimum on these days. The daily curve of hospice utilization vividly illustrated the impact of the SARS epidemic. Hospice March/April May/June July/August September/October [15] . This might partly explain the impact of SARS in middle Taiwan ( Figure 4 ).
Because the NHIRD prohibited any break of confidentiality, we did not continue the analysis hierarchically from geographic location to accreditation level. Instead, we displayed the aggregate data in location and level separately. However, hierarchical modelling could be used to examine the factors associated with reduced utilization and would help construct a real-time and on-line analytical processing system for nationwide surveillance during an outbreak of an infectious disease.
A striking feature of the SARS epidemic in Taiwan was that 56.3% of SARS patients were hospital-related [15] . In retrospect, it was reasonable and preferable to reduce hospitalisations. A similar phenomenon was observed simultaneously in childbirth in Taiwan [7] . Many deliveries were shifted from secondary and tertiary care hospitals to primary clinics. The question remains whether continu- ity and quality of care could be ensured. It is unlikely that patients shifted from the 15 hospices in the current study to the other six (unanalysed) hospices, which either quitted or joined the hospice program after the SARS epidemic. However, the possibility of patient flow to other non-hospice wards cannot be excluded. Our claims-based study could not determine whether the needs of patients with terminal illnesses were met during the epidemic, and threw no light on the psychological impact on patients and healthcare workers [20] .
The SARS epidemic will not be the last to affect humankind. The lessons for the hospice society in Taiwan and for the world might be to distribute services into well-balanced networks, e.g. hospice care at home (through visits by physicians and nurses), shared hospice care in hospitals (i.e. providing hospice care in non-hospice wards), and hospice care at independent hospices in the community. A seamless continuity of care between facilities should be ensured at all times. months of 2002, stratified by geographic location 