Yes, we have one specific unit for zoonotic diseases Yes, but we are separated further (e.g. vector-borne diseases, or food-borne zoonoses, etc) No N/A, please specify why: 9. Please provide the budget available for zoonotic diseases (even if you don't have a specific zoonoses unit) in 2014 (in thousands of US $). We recognize that in many countries health-related funds are decentralized. We are NOT asking for these. We only ask for those directly administered at the national level within the country's Ministry. Please provide details in thousands of US $ for: 9.1. Personnel (e.g. $700,000): 9.2. Program Activities (e.g. surveillance, control, etc) (e.g. $120,000): 
Questions 11 to 19 refer specifically to ENDEMIC zoonoses (that is, those already present in your country)
We understand that there are different levels at which disease prioritization can be performed (for all diseases, for communicable diseases only, for zoonoses only). We only want to know if zoonoses are prioritized, either as part of a larger prioritization exercise or not, and which zoonoses are most important to your country. We also understand that ideally the criteria for prioritization should be the same for all diseases, however, we provide options for each zoonosis in case different approaches were followed.
12. Based on the formal prioritization, as in question 11, please list your top three endemic zoonoses (please consider foodborne, vector-borne, wildlife, etc) from most important to least important reflecting the current priorities for your organization. If you answered "No" to question 11, please provide the three endemic zoonoses that you consider priority based on your experience. Please be as specific as possible and list genus, species, and subspecies if possible (e.g. Escherichia coli O157:H7). 
We understand that you may have prioritized jointly endemic and emerging zoonoses. However, other countries may have followed a different approach. This is why emerging zoonoses, and their prioritization criteria are asked separately. 23. Either based on your experience, or from the latest formal prioritization conducted by your Ministry please describe what impact/s were considered to rank the three top emerging zoonoses. If your Ministry did not elicit the impact, and you do not want to provide this information in your personal capacity, please select option "NA" below. Please select all options that apply. 30. Are you currently conducting syndromic surveillance targeted at earlier or more sensitive detection of any of the zoonoses above, either endemic or emerging? If yes, please indicate for which zoonoses below.
If yes, please indicate for which zoonotic diseases, emerging or endemic, you are conducting syndromic surveillance: 31. How would you rank the relationship your ministry has with the Ministry of Health/Agriculture? 1 -Very productive, we coordinate on many issues and share data 2 -Overall productive with some coordinated activities and programs and some data sharing 3 -Minimal productivity with few attempts to coordinate an activity or share data