: Flow diagram of the 2-strain SEIR co-infection model structure. Solid arrows indicate flow through the infection process once a bird becomes infected. V A virions are shed by birds in the following states: n IS , n IR , n IE . V B virions are shed by birds in the states: n SI , n RI , n EI . V AB virions are shed only by birds in the n II state.
Table S1 provides the baseline parameter values used in the simulation model for the estimation of the Critical Community Size (CCS). 
The latent period and duration of infectiousness were described by a gamma distribution implemented as the sum of four exponential distributions [15] . The mean latent period was 1 day [3, 4] , and 99% of birds had passed through the E compartments after 2.4 days. The mean infectious period was 5 days [5, 3] , and 99% of birds had passed through the I compartments after 12.6 days. The total number of birds transitioning from each compartment at any given time step ∆t were sampled from the binomial distribution. When more than one transition was possible, the numbers that moved to each compartment were drawn from a multinomial distribution according to each hazards relative contribution to the overall hazard of leaving the compartment. Equivalent deterministic model equations are provided in the supplementary information.
The equivalent 2-strain deterministic model of disease transmission were governed by the following system of differential equations (in the absence of buying and selling). The first subscript denotes the progression of infection with strain A and the second denotes progression of infection with strain B : Equation 1, reflects S birds becoming infected. Equations 2 to 4 represent the progression of infection with strain A.
Here λ A is defined as:
Here β wf,A was the transmission parameter, which was the probability that contact with an infectious bird resulted in successful onwards transmission of infection to another bird.
n IS (t) + n IE (t) + n IR (t) was the total number of infectious birds with strain A in the market, at each time point. This was divided by the total population size of the market N (t). For the environmental transmission component β env was the probability that an infectious virion in the environment successfully infected a bird. V A (t) was the concentration of infectious virions of strain A in the environment at time t and ψ was the concentration of virions that resulted in 50% of the maximum infection rate [14, 13, 12] . Virions entered the environment as they were exhaled or excreted by infectious birds, at a rate ω and decayed at a constant rate η. Similarly λ B for the B is:
and λ AB :
Therefore the force of infection for each strain consisted of two components. The first was the within-flock force of infection representing direct bird-to-bird transmission, modelled as a frequency-dependent process. The second was the environmental transmission component which was modelled as a density-dependent process. As bird-to-bird transmission was modelled as a frequency-dependent process, we assumed a bird's ability to infect a fixed number of birds was not affected by increases or decreases in the size of the market population. This assumption implied that the direct transmission potential of infected birds was restricted, and in reality may reflect the movement restrictions birds experience within the market, as they are likely to be caged up or crammed within a pen. This contact rate assumption is supported by experimental work [2] . Environmental transmission was modelled as a densitydependent process. Dispersal of infectious matter is likely to be less spatially restricted than bird-to-bird contact, and the spread of fomites has been shown to occur through the air and wind dispersal [16, 17] . In addition, unlike markets in Hong Kong where cleaning and closure of the markets is done on a routine basis [18, 19] , the vast majority of rural markets are rarely if ever cleaned. The assumption of density-dependent environmental transmission may be unrealistic because the environment itself will have a maximum capacity in terms of the concentration of virions it can maintain. However it seems reasonable that the true mechanism of transmission in the market could be described by a mix of frequency and density-dependent transmission. Neither of the ways in which transmission has been modelled are likely to describe the system perfectly, however the inclusion of both mechanisms may capture the variation inherent in the system.
Equations 8 to 10 represent the progression of infection with strain B.
Equations 11 to 14 represent birds who have been co-infected with both strains. They can be exposed to both, infectious with both, or exposed to one and infectious with the other.
Birds that have recovered from infection with strain A and have been infected with strain B.
The last set of equations model the concentration of virions of each strain in the environment.
The model described by the differential equations 1 to 19 and presented in Figure S1 was implemented in a stochastic framework. The concentration of virons in equations 20 to 22
were modelled deterministically.
The R 0 for the single strain market model which included both within flock transmission and environmental transmission was calculated as follows.
The within flock component of R 0 (R wf 0 ) for the SEIR single strain model in the absence of environmental transmission is as follows:
Firstly, we need to account for the probability that birds make it through each of the 4 E compartments without being sold, and thus progress to the infectious state. The probability of making it through a single E compartment is:
therfore the probability that a bird makes it through all 4 compartments is:
The duration of time a bird spends in the first I compartment is:
hence, for the 2nd I compartment we consider the probability a bird makes it through the first I compartment and the duration of time spent in the second compartment:
thus, for the third I compartment we get:
and for the fourth I compartment we get:
Summing this geometric series this simplifies to:
therefore the within flock R 0 is:
The first term reflects the probability that a bird progresses from infected to infectious whilst still in the market. The second term accounts for the time spent in the I state where a bird can transmit infection. β wf is the transmission rate between an infectious and susceptible bird.
We then need to calculate the contribution to R 0 from environmental transmission, denoted R env 0 . To do this, we first consider a situation where the I is represented by only 1 compartment (this comparably more simple derivation is presented for illustratory purposes), therefore we can look at the expected number of virions excreted by a single bird over the course of infection. Starting with only one bird in the E state, zero birds in the I, a wholly susceptible population and a clean environment, we can calculate the amount of time spent infected by solving the following:
Equations 31 and 32 can be solved analytically to give:
We can then assess how many virions are excreted by this single infected bird by solving:
This can be solved analytically (again under the assumption of a 1 compartment model)
to give:
Knowing the number of virions in the environment over time, we can calculate the probability of a bird becoming infected as follows:
under the assumption that the number of virions from a single bird is very small (V 1 ψ), we can make some simplifying assumptions:
and hence using the Taylor expansion, (where e x ≈ 1 +x for small x) we obtain:
We can therefore calculate the total number of environmental transmissions as follows:
Therefore by extension if we then consider the four compartmental model (as assumed throughout the manuscript) the environmental R 0 is proportional to the time spent secreting virus, hence R env 0 is:
Where the first term considers the probability that a bird makes it to the I state while still in the market. The second term is a measure for the concentration of virions in the environment, hence we consider the ratio of production ω to decay η, N reflects the densitydependence of environmental transmission and ψ is the concentration of virions that results in 50% of the maximum infection rate. The third term is the mean time spent in the I state while a bird is in the market and β env is the transmission rate between the environment and a susceptible bird.
and finally, the total basic reproduction number was:
Selecting an appropriate seed size for CCS estimation
The CCS was estimated through simulation. Infection within the market was seeded for 1 day with 25 birds for the single strain analysis and 50 birds (25 of each strain) for the coinfection analysis. 1,000 stochastic realisations were run for each N for 365 days to calculate the fadeout fraction.
We calculated the invasion probability for an R 0 of 1.15 across a range of different seed sizes (from 1-50 seeds) for a single , as shown in Figure S3 . Invasion probability for a fixed value of R 0 and a given seed size was performed according to the method outlined in [20] .
We therefore selected a seed size of 25 as this ensured a high probability of invading. q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q q 
Number of seeds Invasion probability Figure S2 : The invasion probability for a single strain across a range of seed sizes, from 1 -50 seeds. We use this curve to determine an appropriate number of seeds to initialise the CCS simulations.
Seeding models evaluated for the 2-strain model R 0 for a single strain
Estimates of R 0 for each scenario analysed to estimate the CCS (Table S3) .
t
No seeding -1 Seeding -1
No seeding -2 Seeding -2 Figure S3 : Schematic of infection seeding scenarios. Infection was seeded into the market over short periods of time followed by slightly longer periods where infection was not seeded. The two colours (black and red) indicate that the seeding of the two different s occurred at different times.
We investigated how variation in 4 key assumed epidemiological parameters altered the probability of persistence for a single strain within our model. We performed a latin hypercube sample of 1000 different parameter sets for each of the 4 different market population sizes selected and calculate the probability of persistence for each parameter set after 500 stochastic realisations. We then calculated the partial rank correlation coefficient (PRCC) for each parameter to quantify the significance of their impact on the outcome variable (in our case the probability of persistence of a single strain). We calculated the standard deviation of the mean for probability of persistence for each range of parameter values provided, we used +/-the standard deviation of the mean to calculate the uncertainty about the mean for all parameters, this uncertainty is presented as a polygon in each figure (Figure 2 ). We then calculated the partial rank correlation coefficient for each parameter and the outcome variable for the 4 different population sizes tested, results are presented in Tables S4 and S5 .
We initially plotted the relationship between the fade-out fraction and market population size for each parameter ( Figure S4 ). The name of each model used. 2 The range of prevalence of infection of birds brought into the market. 3 The range of days for which no seeding occurred i.e. no new infected birds were introduced into the market. The two sets of numbers represent the ranges of days used for strain A and strain B. 4 The ranges of days for which seeding did occur i.e. new infected birds were introduced into the market. The two sets of numbers represent the ranges of days used for strain A and strain B.
Persistence and CCS estimates of a single and co-infecting strains with instantaneous and gradual market turnover c) d) Figure S5 : The CCS estimated through simulation analysis for 1000 realisations, for a range of instantaneous and gradual market turnover rates. a) For a fixed market turnover rate of 50% assuming the baseline level of transmissibility, the fade-out fraction for a single strain within the market for a range of population sizes is indicated. b) For a fixed market turnover rate of 50% assuming the baseline level of transmissibility, the fade-out fraction of the co-infecting strain within the market for a range of population sizes is indicated. c) For a gradual market turnover rate of 50% assuming the baseline level of transmissibility, the fade-out fraction for a single-strain within the market for a range of population sizes is indicated. d) For a gradual market turnover rate of 50% assuming the baseline level of transmissibility, the fade-out fraction for the co-infecting strain within the market for a range of population sizes is indicated.
Persistence of a co-infected under vary sensitivities CCS for co-infected strain with variable market turnover and the duration of the latent period
We assessed the estimate of the CCS across a range of plausible latent periods and market turnover rates ( Figure S6 ). This was done as it has been shown that the duration of the latent period can be vary by dose and strain. We considered a range of latent periods with a mean duration between 0.5 -6 days. Overall, as the duration of the incubation period and the market turnover rate increased the estimated size of the CCS increased substantially.
We observed that as the probability of transmission increased for a fixed population size the probability of persistence of the co-infected strain increased ( Figure S7) . Equally, for a fixed level of transmissibility, shedding and decay rates as well as infection duration, as the population size increased the probability of persistence also increased. Figure S7 : The probability of persistence for the co-infecting strain for a range of different population sizes, with increasing and decreasing levels of: transmissibility from other birds and the environment, shedding and decay rates as well as infection duration and market turnover rates. The colour indicates probability of fade out for each parameter set calculated from 1000 iterations.
We began by exploring whether the 2-strain dynamics observed in the Shantou wLBM surveillance data could be reproduced by autochthonous transmission (sustained transmission without importation). We seeded each strain for five days once only, where a fixed proportion (0.4) of birds came into the market in the I state for this time period, while the remaining birds were imported in the S state.
Comparing the results of the simulation with a single five day seed to the surveillance data ( Figure S8 ), autochthonous transmission alone was unable to ensure that the regular outbreaks observed in the data were generated in the simulation. Therefore we explored whether random periods of seeding and non-seeding times could better replicate the observed dynamics. evaluated, as we note some models performed well across several summary statistics but poorly across 1, resulting in the intersection across all 4 statistics being equal to 0.
Overall for models 5-10 we saw a very poor intersection between summary statistics across all combinations evaluated.
We draw four random subsets from the best performing model and plot them against the data to assess the visual fit ( Figure S9 ). Table 1 . Red and orange indicate the two co-circulating strains. Solid line are the data and dashed lines are the simulation output. We note that while not every realisation fits visually well to the data, this model was selected on the basis that it was able to capture the summary statistics derived from the data and hence captures the key epidemiological features of the system.