Laboratory investigations were conducted on-site at CERMEL's laboratories in Lambaréné (Gabon). Further bacteriological and viral advanced molecular testings were performed in specialized laboratories of partner universities in Hamburg, Bonn, Gießen, Münster, and Tübingen (Germany).
In blood: antigen detecting rapid diagnostic tests were used: Paracheck Pf dipstick All these points of care tests were performed according to manufacturers' instructions.
Thick blood smears were applied for malaria microscopic diagnosis. Staining was done by 20 minutes immersion into a 10% Giemsa solution and Plasmodium spp. asexual forms were determined by the Lambaréné method as described elsewhere 1 . Urine and stool cultures were performed using the procedures described in the respective microbiology laboratories specific standard operating procedures (SOPs). A urine culture was considered positive if it yielded 100,000 colony forming units per milliliter (CFU/mL).
For blood culture, between 1 and 3 mL of blood was collected in Bactec Peds Plus culture bottles and incubated in a Bactec 9050 blood culture system (BD Biosciences). Positive samples were cultured on blood agar, chocolate agar, and cysteine-, lactose-, and electrolyte-deficient agar. Suspicious colonies were subjected to species identification using API-E test strips (bioMérieux, Marcy l'Etoile, France). In Germany, both species confirmation and antimicrobial susceptibility testing were done using Vitek 2 automated test systems (bioMérieux) and EUCAST breakpoints. 
All samples underwent an initial screening for Plasmodium infection done by Pan-Plasmodium reverse transcription quantitative PCR (RT-qPCR) assay as reported elsewhere 18 .
For the identification of malaria species would be processed in two subsequent steps:
Step 1: In order to be used as a template for quantitative real-time PCR (qPCR) assay, all samples initially positive by the Pan-Plasmodium RT-qPCR assay underwent a conventional PCR amplification following a protocol described earlier 19 . The volume for this amplification was set to 50µL containing: 7.5 µL of nucleic acids extract, 300µM of each primer (PLU5 and PLU6), 1X Qiagen PCR buffer with 1·5mM MgCl2, 250 µM dNTPs each, and 1U Taq DNA polymerase (Qiagen, cat #201223). The following cycling conditions were used: denaturation at 95°C for 5 minutes, then by series of 20 cycles (95°C for 30 s, 58°C for 30 s, and 72°C for 1:20 min) and a final extension at 72°C for 5 minutes.
Step 2: For the diagnosis of Plasmodium spp. infections primers and probes P. malariae, P. ovale curtisi, P. ovale wallikeri, for P. falciparum and for P. vivax 20 were developed for that purpose. The monoplex qPCR assay was performed for the following human malaria species: P. falciparum, P. malariae, P. ovale curtisi, P. ovale wallikeri, and P. vivax using the LightCycler 480 Instrument II (Roche Applied Science). Each qPCR assay was made of 2.5µL of the pre-amplified product, 1X SensiMix II Probe No-ROX, 300µM of each primer pair, and 150 µM of each probe per 10µL final reaction volume. The cycling conditions were as follows: polymerase activation for 10 min at 94°C, followed by 45 cycles of (10 seconds at 95°C and for 60 seconds at 60°C). All samples, along with nontemplate control (NTC) and positive control, were tested in duplicate. The LightCycler 480 software (version 1.5.1.62) automatically calculated and generated the quantification threshold cycle value (Ct) using the second derivative maximum method integrated.
Positivity was assessed visually by analyzing the amplification curves for variability between each sample replicates (SD ≤ 1 cycle) and the quantification threshold value less than 40 (Ct <40). All the assays were tested and validated in accordance with MIQE guidelines 21 .
Chest X-rays were performed on-site in the context of clinical activities performed routinely during pediatric care. All the features considered as abnormal findings were interpreted using the standardized interpretation of pediatric chest radiographs for the The title describes the study design as "a cross-sectional hospital-based study".
(b) Provide in the abstract an informative and balanced summary of what was done and what was found
The abstract describes what was done and found in its Methods subsection.
Background/rationale 2 Explain the scientific background and rationale for the investigation being reported
The background and rationale are described in paragraph 1 of the Introduction section.
Objectives 3 State specific objectives, including any prespecified hypotheses
The specific objectives of the study are stated in paragraph 2 of the Introduction section.
Present key elements of study design early in the paper
The study design is presented in the Abstract ["Methods" section] and in the "Study design and setting" subsection of the Methods section.
Describe the setting, locations, and relevant dates, including periods of recruitment, exposure, follow-up, and data collection
The study setting is described in the "Study design and setting" subsection of the Methods section. Case-control study -Give the eligibility criteria, and the sources and methods of case ascertainment and control selection. Give the rationale for the choice of cases and controls Not applicable.
Cross-sectional study -Give the eligibility criteria, and the sources and methods of selection of participants
The selection of participants is described in the "Participants" subsection of the Methods section.
(b) Cohort study -For matched studies, give matching criteria and number of exposed and unexposed Not applicable. Describe any efforts to address potential sources of bias Our efforts in order to minimize both selections and confounding biases were explained in paragraph 3 of the "Data sources and bias assessment" subsection and in paragraph 3 of the "Data management and statistical methods" subsection of the Methods section, respectively.
Explain how the study size was arrived at
The study size was explained in the "Sample size considerations" subsection of the Methods section.
Explain how quantitative variables were handled in the analyses. If applicable, describe which groupings were chosen and why
The way quantitative variables were handled is discussed in paragraph 3 of the "Data management and statistical methods" subsection of the Methods section.
Statistical methods 12 (a) Describe all statistical methods, including those used to control for confounding Statistical methods are described in the "Data management and statistical methods" subsection of the Methods section. (c) Explain how missing data were addressed
The way missing data were handled is described in paragraph 1 of the "Data management and statistical methods" subsection of the Methods section.
(d) Cohort study -If applicable, explain how loss to follow-up was addressed Not applicable.
Case-control study -If applicable, explain how matching of cases and controls was addressed Not applicable.
Cross-sectional study -If applicable, describe analytical methods taking account of sampling strategy Analytical methods are described in paragraph 3 of the "Data management and statistical methods" subsection of the Methods section.
(e) Describe any sensitivity analyses Not applicable.
Participants 13* (a) Report numbers of individuals at each stage of study -e.g. numbers potentially eligible, examined for eligibility, confirmed eligible, included in the study, completing follow-up, and analysed
The number of participants at each level completing each phase of data collection is shown in Fig. 1 . Descriptive data 14* (a) Give characteristics of study participants (e.g. demographic, clinical, social) and information on exposures and potential confounders Characteristics of the study participants are presented in the "Study patients" subsection of the Results section and summarized in Table 1 .
The number of participants with missing data is indicated in parentheses throughout the Results section.
(c) Cohort study -Summarise follow-up time (eg, average and total amount) Not applicable.
Outcome data 15* Cohort study -Report numbers of outcome events or summary measures over time Not applicable.
Case-control study -Report numbers in each exposure category, or summary measures of exposure Not applicable.
Numbers (along with percentages) of outcome events are reported throughout the Results section.
Main results 16 (a) Give unadjusted estimates and, if applicable, confounder-adjusted estimates and their precision (e.g. 95% confidence interval).
Make clear which confounders were adjusted for and why they were included • Physical examination with signs of respiratory distress (i.e. Definite crackles or wheezing in auscultation)
ONE of the following signs
ONE of the following signs 