Background: Cell-based influenza vaccines can solve the problem of the frequent occurrence of egg adaptation-associated antigenic changes observed in egg-based vaccines. Seed viruses for cell-based vaccines can be prepared from clinical specimens by cell culture; however, clinical samples risk harboring respiratory viruses other than influenza virus. Therefore, it is necessary to investigate the patterns of co-infection in clinical samples and explore whether cell culture technology can selectively propa-
Influenza virus is highly transmissible and causes mild to severe illness, including high fever, headache, myalgia, and pneumonia.
Annual influenza epidemics worldwide cause approximately three to five million cases of severe illness and 290 000-650 000 deaths every year, resulting in a great social impact. 1 The economic burden of influenza has been estimated to be $47. The MDCK cell line was established from the kidney of a healthy cocker spaniel dog in 1958 and has a long history in the studies of influenza viruses. The conventional MDCK cell with adherent growth (MDCK-A) is a good candidate for the preparation of vaccine seed viruses, since it supports efficient growth of human influenza viruses. 10, 11 The MDCK33016PF suspension cell line, designated as MDCK-S in this paper, was first developed and utilized to produce seasonal influenza vaccines. [11] [12] [13] Suspension cells are superior to adherent cells owing to the following advantages: simpler culture process without micro-carrier beads, lower cost, and higher virus yield. Therefore, MDCK-S could be a suitable substrate for influenza vaccine seed preparation.
LLC-MK2, established from the kidney of a healthy rhesus monkey, has also been used to propagate a variety of viruses, including the influenza virus. 14-16 LLC-MK2D, which is a sub-line of LLC-MK2, was proven to be non-tumorigenic in nude mice and free of specific adventitious agents. This cell line could be a promising candidate for the preparation of vaccine seed viruses, since its safety is confirmed and it can be used in practical applications with little delay.
In this study, we analyzed the pattern of co-infection of respiratory viruses in clinical specimens and evaluated the ability of MDCK-S, MDCK-A, and LLC-MK2D cells to propagate influenza viruses while eliminating other respiratory viruses. To examine if there were specific patterns of correlation between the detected viruses, all virus pairs in Table 1 were evaluated with (Table 4) . CVEV, RHV, RSVA, RSVB, OC43, and NL63 were 
In this study, using the ResPlex II assay, we analyzed the specific pat- its low ability to multiply influenza viruses and to eliminate the contaminating viruses.
One of the limitations of this study is that the sample size of the multiple infection groups was small. Larger sample sizes will make it possible to identify more correlations among viruses and to test The use of MDCK-S, MDCK-A, and other cell lines could contribute to global public health through the rapid production of safe and effective cell-based vaccines.
We thank the staff at the National Institute of Infectious Diseases, 