We explored whether the difference in social contact patterns between Hong Kong and European countries would result in significant difference in the estimates of age-specific influenza infection attack rates (IARs). In our previous study of the 2009 influenza pandemic 1 , we estimated the agespecific infection attack rates in Hong Kong from a Susceptible-Exposed-Infectious-Removed model constructed based on the European social contact data 2 . We showed that the estimates of agespecific infection attack rates were similar when different contact matrices from the POLYMOD study were used. To investigate whether the IAR estimates are sensitive to the difference between Hong Kong contact data and European contact data, we replicated the study with Hong Kong contact data from this study.
Supplementary Figure S2 compares the IAR estimates across all the age groups when different contact matrices were used. The IAR estimates were largely consistent, except that the IAR of 13-19 years old was slightly higher when Hong Kong contact data were used. In this case study, we showed that the structure of contact matrices had little impact on the age-specific IAR estimates.
Given any contact matrix, the parameter "age-specific susceptibility" would be adjusted in the Bayesian inference algorithm accordingly so that similar transmission dynamics could be generated to match the observed transmission patterns. The high age-assortative within-group contact intensity along the diagonal of contact matrices is the most important finding in all the social contact surveys, and plays a major part in the estimation of age-specific infection attack rates and susceptibility. The Hong Kong contact matrix was constructed with contact data in this manuscript after questionnaire mode was considered in the propensity score analysis. The contact matrices of eight In addition, we also searched the reference list of each article we found to identify additional eligible studies to be included in Table S1 .
Step 1 (relative number of reported contacts)
Step 2 (OR of choosing paper questionnaire)
Step 3 
We showed only two contact entries in Part 3 Contact Diary. There were 100 entries in the actual paper questionnaire we provided to the participants. In the online questionnaire, a dynamic table of contact diary was provided: one additional row of contact entry was shown when participants clicked "add contact".
Thank you for participating in our study "Population-based survey on patterns of social contacts relevant to the spread of infectious diseases in Hong Kong".
The questionnaire consists of 3 sections:
• Your demographic data • Information about persons you usually have contact with • Information about contacts you have made during the assigned date
• I give permission to the investigators to contact me within 12 months for potential follow-up for this study. Please provide your email address, phone number or mailing address. 