Of the eleven ubiquitinated proteins assigned to the term host-virus interaction, six proteins are associated with viral immune evasion, including inhibitor of antigen presentation A36, complement control protein C17, IL-18-binding protein C8, inhibitor of TNF-R and TLR signaling Q1 (VACV N1) and two host range factors F3 (VACV E3) and M1 (VACV K1). Of those proteins, VACV E3 is known to be ubiquitinated but distinct lysine residues have not been identified yet 1 . Also, VACV N1 has been shown to be ubiquitinated at all six possible lysine residues 2 . In our study we were able to identify two conserved ubiquitination sites in the CPXV Q1 protein at positions 70 and 78 which are identical to those in VACV N1. In total, CPXV Q1 contains five lysine residues which are homologous to VACV N1, all of which were found to be ubiquitinated in CPXV HumBer and four of which found to be ubiquitinated in HumGri, RatKre and RatHei. The remaining five CPXV proteins assigned to host-virus interaction include A44, D12, G13, J1 (VACV VH1) and CPXV N1 protein. VH1 is a viral serine/threonine protein phosphatase which is located in LBs and requires a functional proteasome for activity, presumably to release the enzyme from the LBs 3 . We could show that J1, the CPXV homologue of VH1, contains six conserved ubiquitination positions, indicating an ubiquitin-dependent regulation of J1.
A) Supplementary Discussion 1. CPXV proteins with conserved ubiquitination sites (except core proteins) 2. Viral proteins degraded by the proteasome Tables  Table S1: LC-MS/MS analysis of CPXV mature virion ubiquitinome: data overview. Table S2 : Origin of diGly(K) peptides. Table S3 : Quantification of lysine linkages using peptide areas. Table S4 : Identified ubiquitination sites in five CPXV strains. Table S5 : The conserved CPXV IMV ubiquitinome. Table S6 . Ubiquitinated CPXV mature virion proteins without conserved sites. Table S7 : CPXV proteins regulated by the proteasome. Table S8 : Host proteins degraded by the proteasome. DNA replication. Ubiquitination is also involved in CPXV DNA replication 13 . The viral DNA ligase A53, Holliday junction resolvase A23 and the putative nuclease H5 contain conserved ubiquitination positions. Interestingly, the E5 protein, a homologue to the VACV D5 protein, which has been identified as the VACV genome uncoating factor 14 , contains two conserved ubiquitination sites that might be important for uncoating activity as discussed later on.
Membrane. Two membrane proteins A14 and A17 as well as two EEV glycoproteins A35 and B4 contain conserved ubiquitination sites. Although purified IMV particles were analyzed and the co-purification of EEV particles seems unlikely because of their unstable outer membrane 15 , it has been shown that EEV proteins can be detected in IMV virion preparations 16 . Furthermore, the scaffold protein E13 and the H2 protein belonging to the entry/fusion complex are ubiquitinated.
Virus entry into host cell. Three CPXV proteins associated with entry into the host cell were identified to be ubiquitinated. These proteins include the cell fusion protein A28, the IMV heparin-binding surface protein J3 and the myristoylated protein H10.
Proteins with conserved ubiquitination sites assigned to morphogenesis comprise the protein F8, metalloendopeptidase H1, assembly protein H8, telomere-binding protein L1 and the virion protein S1.
Unknown. Also ubiquitination sites on CPXV proteins A50, A52, A7, B2, C3 and F6 of unknown function were identified. A7 is known to locate in the core 17 containing, with 7 diGly(K) sites, the greatest number of ubiquitination sites in unknown CPXV proteins.
Protein processing, viral reproduction and others. This summarized functional term includes the H4 protein, G17 protein, L7 cysteine proteinase and A26 A-type inclusion protein. VACV homologs of the oxidoreductase H4 (Glutaredoxin) and the phosphoprotein G17 have been identified to be part of the LBs 3 . F17 is known to be degraded in a proteasome-dependent manner and suggested to be an LB scaffold protein 3 . The sequence of CPXV G17 is identical to that of the VACV homologue F17 except for amino acid position 83 and contains 7 lysine residues at positions 17, 25, 28, 41, 47, 50 and 74. Five distinct ubiquitination sites of VACV F17 on K25, K28, K41, K47 and K50 have been previously identified by MS 3 . Of those positions, we could identify K25 as a conserved ubiquitination site in CPXV and furthermore identified two additional conserved sites at K17 and K74. In contrast, we were not able to identify ubiquitination at K28 and K41 for CPXV.
Besides the proteasome-dependent degradation of proteins associated with reduction of prereplication sites 14 , a notable number of viral BTB/kelch proteins were found to be regulated by the UPS. Cellular proteins of the BTB/kelch family act as adaptor proteins by an N-terminal BTB domain which interacts with cullin-3 ubiquitin ligase (CUL3) and a C-terminal kelch domain recruiting the substrate to be targeted for proteasomal degradation 18, 19 . CPXV code for six BTB/kelch proteins: A57, B9, B19, C18, D11 and G3. Our data demonstrates that all of the CPXV BTB/kelch proteins except for A57 are degraded in a proteasomedependent manner early in infection. For A57, B19, C18 and G3 the interaction with the cellular CUL3-containing CRL complex has been shown 18 , but so far no substrate of CPXV BTB/kelch proteins has been identified and the distinct role remains unclear. Mercer et al. reported that CUL3-mediated ubiquitination is required for VACV DNA replication 13 , but as CPXV BTB/kelch proteins are not essential for CPXV replication 20 , they are not likely to be the according adapter molecules in this context. However, deletion of CPXV BTB/kelch genes D11L, C18L, G3L and A57R has been shown to lead to altered host range and reduced virulence in mice, illustrating their importance in CPXV infection 21 .
Furthermore, in the context of protein ubiquitination, CPXV encode 13 proteins belonging to the ANK/PRANC protein family which interact with the cellular cullin-1 ubiquitin ligase complex (SCF) 18 . These proteins are characterized by five to ten ankyrin repeats (ANK) at the N-terminus that mediate specific protein-protein interactions and a PRANC (C-terminal pox protein repeat of ankyrin C-terminus) domain similar to the cellular F-box domain 18, 19 . By homology to the F-box domain, ANK/PRANC proteins are suspected to be substrate adaptors for SCF, although no substrate has been identified yet 18, 19 . Additionally, the inhibition of SCF-mediated ubiquitination by binding of OPV ANK/PRANC proteins to SCF has been proposed 19 . Out of the 13 ANK/PRANC proteins, we identified five that are stabilized upon proteasome inhibition, indicating their proteasomal degradation in noninhibitor-treated cells. These proteins include four proteins of unknown function (C1, C3, D14 and K1) as well as the 2'-O-methyltransferase O1. It has also been reported that siRNAmediated knockdown of CUL-1 has no impact on VACV yield 13 . In agreement with this, CPXV ANK/PRANC proteins are not essential for replication 20 and rather may play a role in host range as shown for C9 (CP77) 22 .
The presumed LB scaffold protein F17 (CPXV G17) is known to be degraded by the proteasome early in infection 3 , but we were not able to show the degradation of G17. This was because we did not detect any diGly(K) peptide of G17 in our experiment with HeLa cells, although we previously detected three conserved ubiquitination sites in G17.
Moreover, we found that the CPXV ubiquitin p28-like ligase (C7) is degraded in a proteasome-dependent manner at an early stage of infection. P28 localizes with ubiquitin in VF 23, 24 and is known to be regulated by autoubiquitination and proteasomal degradation 23 , confirming our results. 