If vector is '1', the common name(s) of arthropod vector group(s) responsible for transmission from the reservoir to the target. fleas A binary variable describing whether or not fleas are reported as a biological vector from the reservoir to the target. ticks A binary variable describing whether or not ticks are reported as a biological vector from the reservoir to the target. mosquitoes A binary variable describing whether or not mosquitoes are reported as a biological vector from the reservoir to the target. flies A binary variable describing whether or not flies are reported as a biological vector from the reservoir to the target.
Answers the question, if vector-borne transmission is reported from the reservoir to the target, is the presence of the vector required for continued spillover? region All regions and continents where the described spillover between reservoir and target are known to occur. Worldwide used if the system is reported on six continents. region.standard Region standardized to continent and worldwide abbreviations. Limited to worldwide (W), Africa (AF), Asia (AS), Australia/Oceania (AU), Europe (EU), North America (NA), and South America (SA). n.america A binary variable describing whether or not North America is reported as a location of spillover. '0' is used when region is listed as worldwide. s.america A binary variable describing whether or not South America is reported as a location of spillover. '0' is used when region is described as worldwide. europe A binary variable describing whether or not Europe is reported as a location of spillover. '0' is used when region is described as worldwide. asia A binary variable describing whether or not Asia is reported as a location of spillover. '0' is used when region is described as worldwide. africa A binary variable describing whether or not Africa is reported as a location of spillover. '0' is used when region is described as worldwide. oceania A binary variable describing whether or not Oceania is reported as a location of spillover. '0' is used when region is described as worldwide. worldwide A binary variable describing whether or not worldwide is used to describe the locations of spillover. Systems were classified as worldwide if the disease system described is known to occur on six continents. reservoir
The populations and environments that maintain the pathogen and serve as the source of new cases in the target population(s). Based on the definition given in Haydon et al. (2002) . environment A binary variable describing whether or not an abiotic environment is included in the reservoir. The confidence level (See S2 Text) assigned to the system. Limited to medium and high because systems with confidence of low and none were excluded from this database. rozone
Epidemic potential zone of the system describing the transmission from reservoir to target. The possible entries are: D (dead-end) for an R 0 equal to zero, S (stuttering chains) for an R 0 greater than zero but less than one, and E (epidemic potential) for an R 0 greater than one. hindex
The H index of the pathogen as calculated by Web of Science in September 2015. Only applies to systems with humans listed as a target. All others are 'NA'. top10
A binary variable describing whether or not the system is included in the top 10% high priority zoonotic pathogen (HPZP) subset. Is '1' where hindex is greater than 102.7. top25
A binary variable describing whether or not the system is included in the top 25% high priority zoonotic pathogen (HPZP) subset. Is '1' where hindex is greater than 55. references
Sources of evidence to support the reservoir listed. See Section II of this file for citations. 