Ubiquitin and NEDD8 conjugates decrease following infection with Listeria while ISG15 sites increase a-d) SDS-PAGE of liver homogenate from wild type or USP18 C61A/C61A mice either uninfected or infected with 5 x 10 5 Listeria for 72 hours (three mice of each genotype and condition). e) SDS-PAGE of ubiquitin, NEDD8, ISG15 and ACTIN from MEFs (wild type or Isg15 -/-) uninfected or infected with
Proteomics data for input and ISGylome a) Heatmap showing significantly regulated proteins after non-supervised hierarchical clustering. On the right side, the heatmap is shown with missing values in grey. Two major clusters can be observed corresponding to proteins that are upregulated or downregulated during infection, listed in Supplementary Data 3. b) Since only two major clusters were observed in the heatmap, a t-test was performed (FDR=0.05 and S0=1) to compare protein intensities between all infected and all non-infected samples. Quantified proteins (n=3,055) and the results of the t-tests are listed in Supplementary Data 4. The fold change (in log2) of each protein between the nine infected and nine non-infected samples is shown on the x-axis, while the statistical significance (-log P value) is shown on the y-axis. According to this t-test, 490 proteins were upregulated during infection and 558 were downregulated. c) Distribution of the total proteome, ISGylome (cluster 1 and 2) and ubiquitylome (cluster 3 and 4) in liver from wild type mice infected or not with Listeria, based on LFQ intensity (x-axis) and on the cumulative protein counts (y-axis). Although there is a slight bias towards more abundant proteins, proteins at all expression levels were well represented in both the ISGylome and ubiquitinome, independent of infection. Figure 3 : General properties of ISGylation sites a-b) All lys residues in the proteins within cluster 1 and 2 were categorized into ISGylated sites ("ISG15") or non-ISGylated sites ("Other"). a) The sequence conservation among orthologs for each Lys site was computed. The distributions of sequence conservation were compared between the two categories. b) The relative solvent accessibility (RSA) for each Lys site was computed if structural information is available. For those Lys sites with multiple structures, the reported RSA was the average among all structures. The distributions of RSA were compared between the two categories. Two-tailed t-test was employed to compute the p-value. c) ISGylated site Lys19 of nicotinamide phosphoribosyltransferase (uniprot ID: Q99KQ4) is shown on the structure (PDB 2H3B) 1 Supplementary Figure 5 : Validation of proteins modified by ISG15 a-c) Ectopic expression of ISG15 (either conjugation competent ISG15GG (wild type) or non-conjugatable -ISG15AA) with Ube1L, Ubc8, HERC5 and respective substrates: Myosin 9 and HSP90 in HEK293T or glucose phosphate isomerase in HeLa. Asterisk indicates FLAG-HERC5. d) Immunoblot of mTOR following immunoprecipitation with endogenous mTOR. eg) Immunoblot of mTOR IP with ISG15, ubiquitin and NEDD8 reveals a more slowly migrating band for ISG15 but not for ubiquitin or NEDD8. Raw data are available in the source data file.